<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
	  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
	  xml:lang="es-MX">
    
<head>
    <link href="../css/principal.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <title>Bibliografía</title>
</head>

<body epub:type="chapter">
    <h1 class="titulo2"><span id="biblio"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page333" title="333"/>Bibliografía</span></h1>
    <p class="frances">Abendroth, Michael <em><em>et al</em>.,</em> <em>Hafenarbeit: Eine industriesoziologische Untersuchung der Arbeit und Betriebsverhältnisse in den bremischen Häfen</em>, Campus, Frankfurt, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Abowd, John M., “The Effect of Wage Bargains on the Stock Market Value of the Firm” [1989], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Adams, Charles F., Jr., “A Chapter of Erie”, <em>North American Review</em>, julio de 1869.</p>
    <p class="frances">Adams, Henry C., “Trusts”, <em>Publications of the American Economic Association</em>, tercera serie, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1904.</p>
    <p class="frances">Adams, Roy J. (ed.), <em>Comparative Industrial Relations: Contemporary Research and Theory</em>, Harper Collins, Nueva York, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aghion, Philippe <em>et al</em>., “Optimal Learning by Experimentation”, <em>Review of Economic Studies</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LVIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, junio de 1991, pp.&#160;621-654.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Jean Tirole, “The Management of Innovation”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">CIX</span>, núm.&#160;4, noviembre de 1994, pp.&#160;1185-1209.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Peter Howitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LX</span>, núm.&#160;2, marzo de 1992, pp.&#160;323-351.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Endogenous Growth Theory</em>, Cambridge, <span class="versalitas bajas">MIT</span>, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aglietta, Michael, <em>Régulation et crises du capitalisme: l’expérience des États-Unis</em>, Calmann-Lévy, París, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ahmad, Aijaz, <em>In Theory: Classes, Nations, Literatures</em>, Verso, Londres, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">Akademischer Verein Hütte, <em>Des Ingenieurs Taschenbuch</em>, 19<sup>a</sup>. ed., 2 vols., Wilhelm Ernst &amp; Sohn, Berlín, 1905, pp.&#160;147-170.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page334" title="334"/>Akademischer Verein Hütte, <em>Spravochnaia kniga dlia inzhenerov, arkhitektorov, mekhanikov i studentov, s dop.&#160;Dlia russkikhtekhnikov</em>, G. L. Zandberg (ed.), Skoropech, Moscú, 1909.</p>
    <p class="frances">Alexander, Peter, <em>Workers, War, and the Origins of Apartheid: Labour and Politics in South Africa, 1939-1948</em>, Ohio University, Athens, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Alford, Leon P., ed., <em>Management’s Handbook</em>, The Ronald Press, Nueva York, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Alinsky, Saul D., <em>Rules for Radicals: A Practical Primer for Realistic Radicals</em>, Random House, Nueva York, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Althusser, Louis, <em>Pour Marx</em>, François Maspero, París, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Étienne Balibar, <em>Lire le Capital</em>, 2 vols., 2a. edición, François Maspero, París, 1970, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Altmann, Norbert <em>et al</em>., eds., Technology and Work in German Industry, Routledge, Londres, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">American Historical Association, “Public History, Public Historians, and the American Historical Association: Report of the Task Force on Public History”, 30 de marzo de 2004, Charge 1, en <a target="_blank" href="http://www.historians.org/governance/tfph/tfphreport"> <em>www.historians.org/governance/tfph/tfphreport</em></a></p>
    <p class="frances">Anderson, Elijah, <em>A Place on the Corner</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1978. </p>
    <p class="frances">Anderson, Perry, “Critique of Wilsonism”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;27, septiembre-octubre de 1964, pp.&#160;4-7.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sweden: Study in Social Democracy, Part 2”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;9, mayo-junio de 1961, pp.&#160;41-44. </p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;100, noviembre de 1976. </p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Left in the Fifties”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;29, enero-febrero de 1965, pp.&#160;3-18.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Arguments Within English Marxism</em>, Verso, Londres, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Anderson, Rodney D., <em>Outcasts in Their Own Land: Mexican Industrial Workers, 1906-1911</em>, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Andrews, J. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “The Roots of the Party Crisis-Its Causes and Solution: Document Submitted to the Political Committe of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page335" title="335"/>the Socialist Workers Party [1953]”, en Cannon, <em>Speeches to the Party.</em></p>
    <p class="frances">Andrews, Kenneth R., <em>The Concept of Corporate Strategy</em>, DowJones-Irwin, Homewood, 1971. </p>
    <p class="frances">Arendt, Hannah, <em>The Human Condition</em>, Doubleday, Garden City, 1959.</p>
    <p class="frances">Arensberg, Conrad M., “Behavior and Organization: Industrial Studies”, en John H. Roher y Muzafer Sherif (eds.), <em>Social Psychology at the Crossroads</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1951, pp.&#160;324-352.</p>
    <p class="frances">Argyris, Chris, <em>Personality and Organization: The Conflict between System and the Individual</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aricó, José, <em>La cola del diablo: itinerario de Gramsci en América Latina</em>, Puntosur, Buenos Aires, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Arnesen, Eric, <em>Brotherhoods of Color: Black Railroad Workers and the Struggle for Equality</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 2001. </p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Waterfront Workers of New Orleans: Race, Class, and Politics, 1863-1923</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aron, Raymond, <em>Dix-huit leçons sur la société industrielle</em>, Gallimard, París, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aronowitz, Stanley, <em>False Promises: The Shaping of American Working Class Consciousness</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Crisis in Historical Materialism: Class, Politics, and Culture in Marxist Theory</em>, Praeger, Nueva York, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Working Class Hero: A New Strategy for Labor</em>, Pilgrim, Nueva York, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">Aronson, Robert L., ed., <em>Industrial and Labor Relations Research in Universities: A United States Summary, 1953-1954</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Arrow, Kenneth J., “Utilities, Attitudes, Choices: A Review Note”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVI</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ascher, Charles S., en “Book Reviews”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLVIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, agosto de 1940.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ash, Roberta, <em>Social Movements in America</em>, Markham, Chicago, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page336" title="336"/>Ashenfelter, Orley y George E. Johnson, “Bargaining Theory, Trade Unions and Industrial Strike Activity” [1969], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Averitt, Robert T., <em>The Dual Economy: The Dynamics of American Industry Structure</em>, W. W. Norton, Nueva York, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Azan, Paul J. L., <em>The War of Positions</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1917.</p>
    <p class="frances">Babson, Steve, “General Motors Strike”, <em>La Lettre du GERPISA</em>, núm.&#160;125, octubre de 1998, en <a target="_blank" href="http://www.univ.&#173;evry.fr/PagesHtml/laboratoires/ancien-gerpisa/lettre/numeros/125/firmes"><em>www.univ.-evry.fr/PagesHtml/laboratoires/ancien-gerpisa/lettre/numeros/125/firmes</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “<span class="versaliras">GM</span> Invests $30 Million in Flint Metal Center”, <em>GM News</em>, 11 de junio de 2003, en <a target="_blank" href="http://www.gm.com"><em>www.gm.com</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Babson, Steve, <em>Building the Union: Skilled Workers and Anglo-Gaelic Immigrants in the Rise of the  <span class="versalitas bajas">UAW</span></em> , Rutgers University, Nueva Brunswick, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Unfinished Struggle: Turning Points in American Labor, 1877-Present</em>, Rowman &amp; Littlefield, Lanham, 1999. </p>
    <p class="frances">Bahro, Rudolph, <em>Die Alternative: Zur Kritik des real existierenden Sozialismus</em>, Europäische Verlaganstalt, Colonia, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Baker, Keith M., <em>Inventing the French Revolution: Essays on French Political Culture in the Eighteenth Century</em>, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bakke, E. Wight, <em>Bonds of Organization: An Appraisal of Corporate Human Relations</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1950.</p>
    <p class="frances">Balán, Jorge <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Men in a Developing Society: Geography and Social Mobility in Monterrey</em>, Mexico, University of Texas, Austin, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Baldamus, Wilhelm, <em>Efficiency and Effort: An Analysis of Industrial Administration</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bantjes, Adrian, <em>As If Jesus Walked on Earth: Cardenismo, Sonora, and the Mexican Revolution</em>, Wilmington: Scholarly Resources, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Baran, Paul A. y Paul M. Sweezy, “Monopoly Capital: An Essay on the American Economic and Social Order”, <em>Monthly Review</em>, Nueva York, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page337" title="337"/>Baran, Paul A., “The Political Economy of Growth”, <em>Monthly Review</em>, Nueva York, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barnard, Chester I., <em>The Functions of the Executive</em>, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1938.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barnes, George N., “The Engineering Dispute”, <em>The People’s Journal for Dundee</em>, 7 de agosto de 1897, p.&#160;5.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barney, Jay B., “Strategic Factor Markets: Expectations, Luck, and Business Strategy”, <em>Management Science</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXII</span>, núm.&#160;10, octubre de 1986, pp.&#160;1231-1241.</p>
    <p class="frances">Baron, Ava <em>et al</em>., “An ‘Other’ Side of Gender Antagonism at Work: Men, Boys, and the Remasculinization of Printer’s Work, 1830-1920”, en Ava Baron (ed.), <em>Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American labor</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1991, pp.&#160;57-69.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Gender and Labor History: Learning from the Past, Looking to the Future”, en Ava Baron (ed.), <em>Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American Labor</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1991, pp.&#160;1-46.</p>
    <p class="frances">(ed.)—, <em>Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American Labor</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Organization of Work in a Segmented Economy”, <em>American Sociological Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLIX</span>, núm.&#160;4, agosto de 1984, pp.&#160;454-473.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y William T. Bielby, “Bringing the Firms Back In: Stratification, Segmentation and the Organization of Work”, American Sociological Review, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLV</span>, núm.&#160;5, octubre de 1980, pp.&#160;737-765.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barou, N., <em>British Trade Unions</em>, Victor Gollancz, Londres, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barrett, James R., “Class Act: An Interview with David Montgomery”, <em>Labor: Studies in Working Class History of the Americas</em>, pp.&#160;23-54.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Work and Community in the Jungle: Chicago’s Packinghouse Workers, 1894-1922</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana.</p>
    <p class="frances">Barrier, Christiane, <em>Le combat ouvrier dans une entreprise de pointe</em>, Économie et Humanisme, París, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page338" title="338"/>Bastiat, Frédéric, <em>Selected Essays on Political Economy</em>, traducción al inglés de Seymour Cain, Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Batstone, Eric <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Shop Steward in Action: The Organization of Workplace Conflict and Accomodation</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>The Social Organization of Strikes</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bayat, Assef, <em>Work, Politics and Power: An International Perspective on Workers’ Control and Self-Management</em>, Monthly Review, Nueva York, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Workers and Revolution in Iran: A Third World Experience of Workers’ Control</em>, Zed, Londres, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bean, Ron, <em>Comparative Industrial Relations: An Introduction to Cross—, National Perspectives</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Routledge, Londres, 1994</p>
    <p class="frances">Becker, Marjorie, <em>Setting the Virgin on Fire: Lázaro Cárdenas, Michoacán Peasants, and the Redemption of the Mexican Revolution</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bell, Daniel, <em>The End of Ideology</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bell, Inge P.,  <em><span class="versalitas bajas">CORE</span> and the Strategy of Non-Violence</em>, Random House, Nueva York, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Belleville, Pierre, <em>Une nouvelle classe ouvrière</em>, Julliard, París, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bendix, Reinhard, <em>Work and Authority in Industry: Ideologies of Management in the Course of Industrialization</em>, Wiley, Nueva York, 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bénoit-Guilbot, Odile, “The Sociology of Work”, en <em>International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences</em>, 1968, p.&#160;235.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bensaïd, Daniel, “Neo-Liberal Reform and Popular Rebellion”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;215, enero de 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Benson Soffer, “A Theory of Trade Union Development: The Role of the ‘Autonomous Workman’”, <em>Labor History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, 2, primavera de 1960, pp.&#160;141-163</p>
    <p class="frances">Berg, Ivar E., <em>Industrial Sociology</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bergquist, Charles, <em>Labor in Latin America: Comparative Essays on Chile, Argentina, Venezuela, and Colombia</em>, Stanford University, Stanford, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page339" title="339"/>Bernard Shaw, George, <em>The Fabian Society: Its Early History</em>, Fabian Society, Londres, 1892.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bernstein, Eduard, “Der Kampf im englischen Maschinenbaugewerbe”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XVI</span>/1, núm.&#160;15, 28 de diciembre de 1897, pp.&#160;454-460.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Der Riesen-Ausstand im englischen Kohlengewerbe: Sein Wesen, sein Streitobjekt und seine Begleiterscheinungen”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>/1, núm.&#160;7, 8 de noviembre de 1893, pp.&#160;204-211.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Der Strike als politisches Kampfmittel”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>/1, núm.&#160;22, 21 de febrero de 1894, pp.&#160;694-695.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eine neue Geschichte der Trade Union-Bewegung in England”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>/2, núm.&#160;35, 23 de mayo de 1894, pp.&#160;268-275.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der politische Massenstreik und die politische Lage der Sozialdemokratie in Deutschland</em>, Volkswatch [O. Schütz], Breslau, 1905.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der Streik: Sein Wesen und sein Wirken</em>, Rüten &amp;  Loening, Frankfurt am Main, 1906.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie</em>, J. H. W. Dietz Nachf., Sttutgart, 1899.</p>
    <p class="frances">Besser, Terry L., <em>Team Toyota: Transplanting the Toyota Culture to the Camry Plant in Kentucky</em>, State University of New York, Albany.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bettelheim, Charles, <em>Les problèmes théoriques et pratiques de la planification: Cours professé a l’École Nationale d’Organisation Économique et Sociale</em>, Presses Universitaires de France, París, 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances" >—, <em>Problèmes théoriques et pratiques de la planification</em>, 3<sup>a</sup>. edición, François Maspero, París, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Beynon, Huw, <em>Working for Ford</em>, Penguin, Londres, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Biernacki, Richard, “Language and the Shift from Signs to Practices in Cultural Inquiry”, <em>History and Theory</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIX</span>, 3, octubre de 2000, pp.&#160;289-310.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Method and Metaphor after the New Cultural History”, en Victoria E. Bonnell y Lynn Hunt (eds.), <em>Beyond the Cultural Turn: New Directions in the Study of Society and Culture</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1999, pp.&#160;62-92.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page340" title="340"/>Biernacki, Richard, <em>The Fabrication of Labor: Germany and Britain, 1640-1914</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1995,</p>
    <p class="frances">Bingham, Walter V. D., <em>Aptitudes and Aptitude Testing</em>, Harper &amp;  Bros., Nueva York, 1937</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Bruce V. Moore, <em>How to Interview</em>, Harper &amp;  Bros., Nueva York, 1931</p>
    <p class="frances">Bishop, Robert L., “Duopoly: Collusion or Warfare?”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">L</span>, núm.&#160;5, diciembre de 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blackman, John L., <em>Presidential Seizure in Labor Disputes</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blanc, Louis, “An Account of the Legislation Affecting Labour, and The Condition of the Working Classes in France”, en National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, <em>Trades’ Societies and Strikes: Report of the Committee on Trades’ Societies</em>, John W. Parker &amp; Son, Londres, 1860, pp.&#160;589.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blau, Peter M. y Richard Scott, <em>Formal Organizations: A Comparative Approach</em>, Chandler, San Francisco, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blauner, Robert, <em>Alienation and Freedom: The Factory Worker and His Industry</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blewett, Mary H., “Manhood and the Market: The Politics of Gender and Class among the Textile Workers of Fall River, Massachusetts, 1870-1880”, en Jacquelyn D. Hall <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Like a Family: The Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World</em>, Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Last Generation: Work and Life in the Textile Mills of Lowell, Massachusetts, 1910-1960</em>, University of Massachusetts, Am herst, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Blum, Solomon, <em>Labor Economics</em>, Henry Holt and Company, Nueva York, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bobylev, Dmitrii K., <em>Kurs analiticheskoi mekhaniki</em>, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed., 2 vols., Iu. N. Erlikh, San Petersburgo, 1909.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bodington, Stephen, <em>Computers and Socialism</em>, Spokesman Books, Nottingham, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Boggs, Grace Lee, <em>Living for Change: An Autobiography</em>, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page341" title="341"/>Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen von, “Grundzüge der Theorie des wirthschaftlichen Güterwerts”, <em>Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLVII</span>, nueva serie, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, 6, 1886, pp.&#160;480-489.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Macht oder ökonomisches Gesetz?”, <em>Zeitschrift für Volkswirtschaft, Sozialpolitik und Verwaltung</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII</span>, 3-4, diciembre de 1914.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Kapital und Kapitalzins</em>, 3 vols. en 2, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed., Wagner’schen Universitäts, Innsbruck, 1909-1914. </p>
    <p class="frances">Bohn, William E., <em>I Remember America</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bonazzi, Giuseppe, <em>In una fabbrica di motori: Organizzazione del lavoro, potere padronale e lotte operaie</em>, Feltrinelli, Milán, 1975. </p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Lineamenti critici di sociologia dell’organizzazione</em>, Giappichelli, Turín, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bonnet, Serge y Roger Humbert, <em>La ligne rouge des hauts fourneaux: Grèves dans le fer lorrain en 1905</em>, Denoël, París, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Borjas, George J., <em>Labor Economics</em>, Irwin McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 2000, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed</p>
    <p class="frances">Borsdorf, Ulrich <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Arbeiterinitiative 1945: Antifaschistische Ausschüsse der Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland</em>, Peter Hammer, Wuppertal, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bousquet, G. H., “Les systèmes socialistes” [1902-03], en <em>Vilfredo Pareto: sa vie et son oeuvre</em>, Payot, París, 1928, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Manuel d’économie politique” [1909], en <em>Vilfredo Pareto: sa vie et son oeuvre</em>, Payot, París, 1928, vol.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Vilfredo Pareto: sa vie et son oeuvre</em>, Payot, París, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bowley, A. L., “Bilateral Monopoly”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, diciembre de 1928, pp.&#160;651-659.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Mathematical Groundwork of Economics: An Introductory Treatise</em>, Clarendon, Oxford, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Boyer, Robert, <em>La théorie de la régulation: une analyse critique</em>, La Découverte, París, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Boyle, Kevin, <em>The  <span class="versalitas bajas">UAW</span> and the Heyday of American Liberalism, 1945-1968</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Boyte, Harry C., <em>The Backyard Revolution: Understanding the New Citizen Movement</em>, Temple University, Philadelphia, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page342" title="342"/>Braverman, Harry, “Labor and Politics”, en Bert Cochran (ed.), <em>American Labor in Mid-Passage</em>, Monthly Review, Nueva York, 1959, pp.&#160;99-112.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century</em>, Monthly Review, Nueva York, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brennan, James P., <em>The Labor Wars in Córdoba, 1955-1976: Ideology, Work, and Labor Politics in an Argentine Industrial City</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brentano, Lujo, ed., <em>“Arbeitseinstellungen und Fortbildung des Arbeitsvertrags”, Schriften des Vereins für Socialpolitik</em>, 45, 1890.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bricanier, Serge, ed., <em>Pannekoek et los conseils ouvriers</em>, Études et Documentations Internationales, París, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bright, James R., <em>Automation and Management</em>, Harvard Bussiness School, Boston, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brill, Harry, <em>Why Organizers Fail: The Story of a Rent Strike</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brinton, Crane, <em>The Anatomy of Revolution</em>, W. W. Norton, Nueva York, 1938.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brody, David, “Review: <em>Strife on the Waterfront: The Port of New York since 1945</em>, by Vernon H. Jensen”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">CXXX</span>, 4, octubre de 1975, p.&#160;1064.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor in Crisis: The Steel Strike of 1919</em>, Lippincott, Filadelfia, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Steelworkers in America: The Nonunion Era</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1960</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Butcher Workmen: A Study of Unionism</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 196</p>
    <p class="frances">Bronfenbrenner, Kate, <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, eds., <em>Organizing to Win: New Research on Union Strategies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">ILR</span>, Ithaca, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brown, Francis, <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>The Brown-Driver-Briggs Hebrew and English Lexicon</em> [1906], Peabody, Hendrickson.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brown, Jonathan C., ed., <em>Workers’ Control in Latin America, 1930-1979</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Brown, William A., <em>Piecework Bargaining</em>, Heinemann, Londres, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page343" title="343"/>Brunetta, Ernesto, “Clausewitz” [reseña de Emilio Canevari, <em>Clausewitz e la guerra odierna</em>, F. Campitelli, Roma, 1933], <em>L’Italia Letteraria</em>, 4 de febrero de 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bücher, Karl, <em>Die Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft: Sechs Vorträge</em>, H. Laupp, Tubinga, 1893.</p>
    <p class="frances">Buhle, Mari Jo y Paul Buhle, “The New Labor History at the Cultural Crossroads”, <em>Journal of American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXV</span>, 1, junio de 1988, pp.&#160;151-157.</p>
    <p class="frances">Buhle, Paul, “From the Arm and Hammer to ‘The Simpsons’: The Evolution of Working-Class Culture”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, núm.&#160;9, otoño de 2001, pp.&#160;9-22.</p>
    <p class="frances">Bujarin, N., <em>Lenin as a Marxist</em>, Communist Party of Gt. [<em>sic</em>] Britain, Londres, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Revoliutsionnyi teoretik</em>, Gosudarstevennoe Izda-tel’stvo, Leningrado, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “O zadachakh i strukture profsoyuzov [16 de enero de 1921]”, en N. N. Popov (ed.), <em>Protokoly c’ezdov y konferentsii Vsecoyuznoi Kommunisticheskoi Partii (b): Desiatyi c’ezd  RKP (b), mart 1921 g.</em>, Partiinoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1933, pp.&#160;801-804.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Marx’s Teaching and Its Historical Importance”, en Bujarin, N. I., <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Marxism and Modern Thought</em>, traducción al inglés de Ralph Fox, Londres, G. Routledge &amp; Sons, 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Teoriia proletarskoi diktatury”, en N. Bujarin <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Oktiabr’skii perevorot i diktatura proletariata: sbornik statei</em>, Gosudarstevennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1919, pp.&#160;5-21.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Theory and Practice from the Standpoint of Dialectical Materialism”, <em>Science at the Cross Roads: Papers Presented to the International Congress of the History of Science and Technology</em> [1931], Frank Cass &amp; Co., Londres, 1971, pp.&#160;11-33.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Ekonomika perekhodnogo perioda: Chast’ 1, Obshchaia teoriia transformatsionnogo protsessa</em>, Gosudarstevennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Politics and Economics of the Transition Period</em>, traducción al inglés de Oliver Field, Routledge-Kegan Paul, Londres, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page344" title="344"/>Bujarin, N., <em>Theorie des historischen Materialismus: Gemeinverständliches Lehrbuch der marxistischen Soziologie</em>, traducción al alemán de Frida Rubiner, Kommunistische Internationale, Berlín, 1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Economic Theory of the Leisure Class [sic,</em> para <em>Politicheskaia ekonomiia rant’e: Teoriia tsennosti i pribyli avstriiskoi shkoly, o Political Economy of Rentier Capital: The Austrian School’s Theory of Interest and Profit, 1914]</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">Burawoy, Michael, “The Anthropology of Industrial Work”, <em>Annual Review of Anthropology</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, 1979.</p>    
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Constraint and Manipulation in Industrial Conflict: A Comparison of Strikes among Zambian Workers in a Clothing Factory and the Mining Industry</em>, University of Zambia, Lusaka, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Manufacturing Consent: Changes in the labor Process under Monopoly Capitalism</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Politics of Production: Factory Regimes under Capitalism and Socialism</em>, Verso, Londres, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Burns, Emile, <em>The General Strike, May 1926: Trades Councils in Action</em>, Labour Research Department, Londres, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">Burns, Tom y George M. Stalker, <em>The Management of Innovation</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Burrell, Gibson y Gareth Morgan, <em>Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis: Elements of the Sociology of Corporate Life</em>, Heinemann, Londres, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Callwell, C. E., <em>Small Wars: Their Principles and Practice</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">hmso</span>, Londres, 1906, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cambereri, Serafino, “Il Concetto di egemonia nel pensiero di Gramsci”, en <em>Studi gramsciani: Atti del convegno tenuto a Roma nei giorni 11-13 gennaio 1958</em>, Editoriale Riuniti, Roma, 1958, pp.&#160;87-94.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cameron, Ardis, <em>Radicals of the Worst Sort: Laboring Women in Lawrence, Massachusetts, 1860-1912</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cameron, Rondo, <em>A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic Times to the Present</em>, Oxford University Press, Nueva York, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cammet, John M., <em>Antonio Gramsci and the Origins of the Italian Communist Party</em>, Stanford University, Stanford, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page345" title="345"/>Cannon, James P., <em>American Stalinism and Anti-Stalinism</em>, Pioneer, Nueva York, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Speeches to the Party: The Revolutionary Perspective and the Revolutionary Party</em> [1952-1953], Pathfinder, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Struggle for Socialism in the “American Century”: Writings and Speeches, 1945-1947</em>, Pathfinder, Nueva York, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Caplow, Theodore, <em>The Sociology of Work</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Carlyle, Thomas, <em>Sartor Resartus: The Life and Opinions of Herr Treufelsdrökh</em> [1830], J. M. Dent &amp; Co., Londres, 1902.</p>
    <p class="frances">Carvalho, Ruy de Quadros, <em>Tecnologia e trabalho industrial: as implicacões sociais da automacão microelectrónica na indústria automobilística</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">L&amp;PM</span>, Porto Alegre, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cassuto, U., <em>A Commentary on the Book of Genesis</em>, 2 vols., Magnes Press, Jerusalén, 1998, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Castoriadis, Cornelius, “Phénomenologie de la conscience prolétarienne” [1948], en Cornelius Castoriadis, <em>La société bureaucratique</em>, 2 vols., Union Générale d’Éditions, París, 1973, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Socialisme ou barbarie” [1949], <em>La société bureaucratique</em>, 2 vols., Union Générale d’Éditions, París, 1973, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cauley, Leslie, “Verizon, Unions Tentatively Reach Pact”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 21 de agosto de 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cavendish, Ruth, <em>Women on the Line</em>, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, Londres, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Caves, Richard E., “Industrial Organization, Corporate Strategy and Structure”, <em>Journal of Economic Literature</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1980, pp.&#160;64-92.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y M. E. Porter, “From Entry Barriers to Mobility Barriers: Conjectural Decisions and Contrived Deterrence to New Competition”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XCI</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1977, pp.&#160;241-262.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Richard H. Holton, <em>The Canadian Economy: Prospect and Retrospect</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1959.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Trade and Economic Structure: Models and Methods</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page346" title="346"/>Caviglia, Enrico, <em>La Battaglia della Bainsizza: Seguita da uno studio sulla direzione politica e il comando militare nella grande guerra</em>, A. Mondadori, Milán, 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>La tre battaglie del Piave</em>, A. Mondadori, Milán, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chakrabarty, Dipesh, <em>Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Difference</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Rethinking Working-Class History: Bengal, 1890-1940</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chamberlain, Neil W., <em>The Union Challenge to Management Control</em>, Harper &amp; Brothers, Nueva York, 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chamberlin, Edward H., <em>The Theory Monopolistic Competition: A Reorientation of the Theory of Value</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chambers, Whittaker, <em>Witness</em> [1952], Regnery, Chicago, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chandler, Alfred D. Jr., <em>Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the Industrial Enterprise</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">MIT</span>, Cambridge, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chandler, Margaret K., “Garment Manufacture”, en Milton Derber (ed.), <em>Labor-Management Relations in Illini City</em>, 2 vols., University of Illinois, Champaign, 1953-1954, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;379-538.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chartier, Roger, “Writing the Practices”, <em>French Historical Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, 2, primavera de 1998, pp.&#160;255-264.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>On the Edge of the Cliff: History, Language, and Practice</em>, traducción al inglés de Lydia G. Cochrane, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cherbuliez, A.-E., “Coalitions”, en Charles Coquelin y UrbainGilbert Guillaumin (eds.), <em>Dictionnaire de l’économie politique</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chesneaux, Jean <em>Le mouvement ouvrier chinois de 1919 à 1927, Mouton</em>, París, 1962, publicado en inglés en 1968</p>
    <p class="frances">Child, John, “Organizational Structure, Environment and Performance: The Role of Strategic Choice”, <em>Sociology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1972, pp.&#160;1-22.</p>
    <p class="frances">Chinoy, Ely, <em>Automobile Workers and the American Dream</em>, Doubleday, Garden City, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clark, Daniel J., <em>Like Night &amp; Day: Unionization in a Southern Mill Town</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page347" title="347"/>Clark, John Bates, “Review: Untersuchungen über das Kapital, seine Natur und Funktion… Von Otto Wittelshöfer”, <em>Political Science Quarterly</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1891, pp.&#160;175.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Essentials of Economic Theory, As Applied to Modern Problems of Industry and Public Policy</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1907.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Control of Trusts: An Argument in Favor of Curbing the Power of Monopoly by a Natural Method</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1901.</p>
    <p class="frances">- y John M. Clark, <em>The Control of Trusts</em>, revisada y aumentada, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1912.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Problem of Monopoly: A Study of a Grave Danger and of the Natural Mode of Averting It</em>, Columbia University, Nueva York, 1904.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clark, John Maurice, <em>Studies in the Economics of Overhead Costs</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand: A Technical Factor in Economic Cycles”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXV</span>, núm.&#160;3, marzo de 1917, pp.&#160;217-235.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, eds., <em>Readings in the Economics of War</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Strategic Factors in Business Cycles</em>, National Bureau of Economic Research, Nueva York, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clark, Marjorie R., <em>Organized Labor in Mexico</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clark, Victor S., “The Canadian Industrial Disputes Act”, <em>Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science in the City of New York</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1917, p.&#160;18.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clausewitz, Carl von, <em>On War</em>, traducción y edición de Michael Howard y Peter Paret, edición revisada, Princeton University, Princeton, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clegg, Hugh A., <em>The System of Industrial Relations in Great Britain</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">Clegg, Stewart, <em>Power, Rule and Domination: A Critical and Empirical Understanding of Power in Sociological Theory and Organizational Life</em>, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, Londres, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page348" title="348"/>Cliff, Tony, <em>State Capitalism in Russia</em> [1948], Pluto, Londres, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cobble, Dorothy Sue y Alice Kessler-Harris, “The New Labor History in American History Textbooks”, <em>Journal of American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 4, marzo de 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cohen, Lizabeth, <em>Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cohn, Samuel, <em>When Strike Makes Sense-And Why: Lessons from Third Republic French Coal Miners</em>, Plenum, Nueva York, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Colasanti, Giuseppe, “Introduzione: lo sciopero come azione colletiva”, en Giuseppe Colasanti y Luca Perrone, eds., <em>Scioperi e movimenti colletivi: Strikes as Collective Action, The Italian School Approach</em>, Casa del Libro, Roma, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Luca Perrone (eds.), <em>Scioperi e movimenti colletivi: Strikes as Collective Action, The Italian School Approach</em>, Casa del Libro, Roma, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cole, G. D. H., <em>An Introduction to Trade Unionism, Being a Short Study of the Present Position of Trade Unionism in Great Britain Prepared for the Trade Union Survey of the Labour Research Department</em>, George Allen and Unwin, Londres, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The World of Labour: A Discussion of the Present and Future of Trade Unionism</em>, G. Bell and Sons, Londres, 1913.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cole, Robert E., <em>Japanese Blue Collar: The Changing Tradition</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Coleman, James S., <em>The Mathematics of Collective Action</em>, Aldine, Chicago, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Coleman, Slim y George Atkins, <em>Fair Share: The Struggle for the Rights of the People</em>, Justice Graphics, Chicago, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Collins, David y Cynthia A. Montgomery, “Competing on Resources: Strategy in the 1990s [1995]”, en <em>Harvard Business Review on Corporate Strategy</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1999, pp.&#160;33-62.</p>
    <p class="frances">Comité Executif Européen de la IV Internationale, “Résolution sur la stratégie de sections européenes de la IVe Internationale dans les luttes ouvrières”, <em>Quatrième Internationale</em>, nueva serie núm.&#160;4, febrero de 1944, pp.&#160;17-20.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page349" title="349"/>Commons, John R., “Is Class Conflict in America Growing and is it Inevitable?”, <em>American Journal of Sociology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, 6, mayo de 1908.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Teamsters of Chicago”, en John R. Commons (ed.), Trade, <em>Unionism and Labor Problems</em>, Ginn and Co., Boston, 1905, pp.&#160;36.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Types of American Labor Organization-The Teamsters of Chicago”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, 3, mayo de 1905, p.&#160;400.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Institutional Economics: Its Place in Political Economy</em>, 2 vols., Macmillan, Nueva York, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Comte, Auguste, <em>Cours de Philosophie Positive</em>, 6 vols., J. B. Baillière et Fils, París, 1869, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed., vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Conner, Kathleen R., “A Historical Comparison of Resourcebased Theory and Five Schools of Thought Within Industrial Organization Economics: Do We Have a New Theory of the Firm?”, <em>Journal of Management</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVII</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1991, pp.&#160;121-154.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y C. K. Prahalad, “A Resource-Based Theory of the Firm: Knowledge versus Opportunism”, <em>Organization Science</em>, vol. <span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núm.&#160;5, septiembre de 1996, pp.&#160;477-501.</p>
    <p class="frances">Considerant, Victor, <em>Principes du socialisme. Manifeste de la démocracie au  XIX<sup>ème</sup> siècle</em> [1847], Otto Zeller, Osnabrück, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Constantine, J. Robert, ed., <em>Letters of Eugene V. Debs</em>, 3 vols., University of Illinois, Urbana, 1990, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cooke, Morris L., ed., “Giant Power: Large Scale Electrical Development as a Social Factor”, <em>Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">CXVIII</span>, marzo de 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cooper, Frederick, <em>On the African Waterfront: Urban Disorder and the Transformation of Work in Colonial Mombasa</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cooper, Patricia A., “The Faces of Gender: Sex Segregation and Work Relations at Philco, 1928-1938”, en Ava Baron (ed.), <em></em>Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American labor, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1991, pp.&#160;341-344.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page350" title="350"/>Cooper, Patricia A., “What This Country Needs is a Good FiveCent Cigar”, <em>Technology and Culture</em>, pp.&#160;779-807.</p>
    <p class="frances">Copeland, Melvin T., “Marketing”, en President’s Conference on Unemployment, Committee on Recent Economic Changes, <em>V</em>, 2 vols., McGraw Hill, Nueva York, 1929, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Coquelin, Charles, “Coalitions industrielles”, en Charles Coquelin y Urbain G. Guillaumin (eds.), <em>Dictionnaire de l’économie politique</em>, 2 vols., Guillaumin &amp; Cie., París, 1852-1853, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Córdova, Arnaldo, “Gramsci y la izquierda mexicana”, <em>La Ciudad Futura</em>, 6, agosto de 1987, suplemento 4, pp.&#160;14-15.</p>
    <p class="frances">Coriat, Benjamin, <em>L’atelier et la chronomètre: essai sur le taylorisme, le fordisme et la production de masse</em>, Christian Bourgeois, París, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Science, technique et capital</em>, Seuil, París, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cosman, Bard C., <em>The Human Factor: The Harvard Fatigue Laboratory and the Transformation of Taylorism</em>, tesis de licenciatura de la Harvard University, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cournot, Antoine A., <em>Recherches sur les principes mathématiques de la théorie de richesses</em>, Hachette, París, 1838.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cowie, Jefferson R., <em>Capital Moves:  RCA ’s Seventy-Year Quest for Cheap Labor</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Craig, Gordon A., “Delbrück: The Military Historian”, en Peter Paret (ed.), <em>Makers of Modern Strategy, from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1986, pp.&#160;262-280.</p>
    <p class="frances">Critical Art Ensemble, <em>Electronic Civil Disobedience and Other Unpopular Ideas</em>, Autonomedia, Brooklyn, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Electronic Disturbance</em>, Autonomedia, Brooklyn, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Croce, Benedetto, “Azione, Successo e Giudizio: Note in margine al ‘Vom Krieg’ del Clausewitz”, <em>Societá Reale di Napoli: Atti della Reale Accademia di Scienze Morali e Politiche</em>, núm.&#160;56, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Crofton, Rosemary y Gareth Jones, <em>White-Collar Proletariat: Deskilling and Gender in Clerical Work</em>, Temple University, Filadelfia, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cronin, Blaise, “Huge Power Failure Hits Major Cities in U.S. and Canada”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 15 de agosto de 2003.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page351" title="351"/>Cronin, Blaise, “Information Warfare: Peering Inside Pandora’s Postmodern Box”, <em>Library Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;6, 2001, pp.&#160;279-294.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cronin, James E., <em>Industrial Conflict in Modern Britain</em>, Croom Helm, Londres, 1979</p>
    <p class="frances">Crouch, Colin, <em>Trade Unions: The Logic of Collective Action</em>, Fontana, Londres, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Alessandro Pizzorno (eds.), <em>The Resurgence of Class Conflict in Western Europe since 1968</em>, 2 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Crowell, John F., “Business Strategy in National and International Policy”, <em>Scientifi c Monthly</em>, junio de 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Crozier, Michael, <em>Le phénomène bureaucratique: Essai sur les tendances bureaucratiques des systèmes d’organisation modernes et sur leurs rélations en France avec le système social et culturel</em>, Seuil, París, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Usines et syndicats d’Amérique</em>, Éditions Ouvrières, París, 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cunningham, William J., “A Cadet System in Railroad Service”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 1925, p.&#160;404.</p>
    <p class="frances">Cyert, Richard M. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “Observation of a Business Decision”, <em>Journal of Business</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIX</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1956, p.&#160;238.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dahrendorf, Ralf, <em>Soziale Klassen und Klassenkonflikt in der industriellen Gesellschaft</em>, F. Enke, Stuttgart, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dallin, David J., <em>Soviet Espionage</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dameron, Kenneth, “Cooperative Retail Buying of Apparel Goods”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 1928, p.&#160;446.</p>
    <p class="frances">Darbel, Alain <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Travail et travailleurs en Algérie</em>, Mouton, París, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Davidson, John, <em>The Bargain Theory of Wages: A Critical Development from the Historic Theories, Together with an Examination of Certain Wages Factors, the Mobility of Labor, Trade Unionism, and the Methods of Industrial Remuneration</em>, G. p.&#160;Putnam’s Sons, Nueva York, 1898.</p>
    <p class="frances">Davidson, Mark G., “Industry, Organization of”, en Robert H. I. Palgrave (ed.), <em>Dictionary of Political Economy</em>, 3 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page352" title="352"/>Davis, Colin J., <em>Power at Odds: The 1922 National Railroad Shopmen’s Strike</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1997</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Waterfront Revolts: New York and London Dockworkers, 1946-1961</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 2003</p>
    <p class="frances">Davis, Horace B., <em>Labor and Steel</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dawley, Alan, “Workers, Capital, and the State in the Twentieth Century”, en J. Carroll Moody y Alice Kessler-Harris (eds.), <em>Perspectives on American Labor History: The Problems of Synthesis</em>, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Class and Community: The Industrial Revolution in Lynn</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dean, Joel, “Product-Line Policy”, <em>Journal of Business of the University of Chicago</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1950.</p>
    <p class="frances">Deans-Smith, Susan, y Gilbert Joseph, “The Arena of Dispute”, <em>Hispanic Amrican Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 2, mayo de 1999, pp.&#160;203-208.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dearth, Douglas H., “Critical Infrastructures and the Human Target in Information Operations”, en Alan D. Campen y Douglas H. Dearth (eds.), <em>Cyberwar 3.0: Human Factors in Information Operations and Future Conflict</em>, Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, Fairfax, 2000, pp.&#160;203-209.</p>
    <p class="frances">Debs, Eugene V., <em>Writings and Speeches of Eugene V. Debs</em>, Hermit-age Press, Nueva York, 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">Delbridge, Rick, <em>Life on the Line in Contemporary Manufacturing: The Workplace Experience of Lean Production and the “Japanese” Model</em>, Oxford University, Oxford, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Delbrück, Hans, <em>Geschichte der Kriegskunst im Rahmen der politischen Geschichte</em> [1920], 4 vols., Walter de Gruyter &amp; Co., Berlín, 1962-1966, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed., vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Krieg und Politik, 1914-1916</em>, 3 vols., Georg Stilke, Berlín, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">Della Porta, Donatella y Mario Diani, <em>Social Movements: An Introduction</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page353" title="353"/>Demos, John P., “In Search of Reasons for Historians to Read Novels”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">CIII</span>, 5, diciembre de 1998, pp.&#160;1526-1529.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Using Self, Using History”, <em>Journal of American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXXIX</span>, 1, junio de 2002, pp.&#160;37-42.</p>
    <p class="frances">—,The <em>Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story From Early America</em>, Alfred A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Denis, Henri, <em>Le monopole bilatéral</em>, Presses Universitaires, París, 1943.</p>
    <p class="frances">Derrida, Jacques, <em>Spectres de Marx: l’état de la dette, le travail du deuil et la nouvelle Internationale</em>, Éditions Galilée, París, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dinius, Oliver, <em>Work in Brazil’s Steel City: A History of Industrial Relations in Volta Redonda, 1941-1968</em>, tesis doctoral, Universidad de Harvard, 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dixon, Frank H., “Public Regulation of Railway Wages”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1915, pp.&#160;249-251, 254, 256, 259.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dobbs, Farrell, <em>Teamster Rebellion</em>, Monad, Nueva York, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dobofsky, Melvyn, <em>We Shall Be All: A History of the Industrial Workers of the World</em>, Quadrangle, Chicago, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dodd, Chris, “Preparing for a Strike”, <em>Air Line Pilot</em>, marzo de 2001, p.&#160;24.</p>
    <p class="frances">Doeringer, Peter B. y Michael J. Piore, <em>International Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis</em>, Heath, Lexington, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Domínguez, Ricardo, “Digital Zapatismo” [1998], <a target="_blank" href="http://www.thing.net/~rdom/ecd/DigZap.html"><em>www.thing.net/~rdom/ecd/DigZap.html</em></a>.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Donaldson, Lex, <em>In Defence of Organization Theory: A Reply to the Critics</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dore, Ronald P., <em>British Factory, Japanese Factory: The Origins of National Diversity in Industrial Relations</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dorfman, Joseph, <em>The Economic Mind in American Civilization</em>, 5 vols., Viking, Nueva York, 1946-1959.</p>
    <p class="frances">Downey, Gregory J., <em>Telegraph Messenger Boys: Labor, Technology, and Geography</em>, 1850-1950, Routledge, Nueva York, 2002.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page354" title="354"/>Dowrick, Steve y Barbara J. Spencer, “Union Attitudes to Labor Saving Innovation: When are Unions Luddites”, <em>Journal of Labor Economics</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dreazen, Yochi J., “Array of Contracts Hindered Verizon Deal”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 25 de agosto de 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dubin, Robert, <em>The World of Work: Industrial Society and Human Relations</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Working: Union-Management Relations</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dubofsky, Melvyn y Willard Van Tyne, <em>John L. Lewis: A Biography</em>, Quadrangle, Nueva York, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dubois, Pierre, <em>Le sabotage dans l’industrie</em>, Calmann-Lévy, París, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dunlop, John T., “Chapter 26: The Changing Status of Labor”, en Harold F. Williamson (ed.), <em>The Growth of the American Economy: An Introduction to the Economic History of the United States</em>, Prentice-Hall, Nueva York, 1944.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, e Irving Brown, <em>Labor and International Affairs: Two Views</em> [tercera y cuarta conferencias en homenaje a Samuel D. Berger], Georgetown University, Washington, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Benjamin Higgins, “‘Bargaining Power’ and Market Structures”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1942, pp.&#160;1-26.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Neil W. Chamberlain, eds., <em>Frontiers of Collective Bargaining</em>, Harper &amp; Row, Nueva York, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Labor, Markets and Wage Determination: Then and Now”, en Bruce E. Kaufman (ed.), <em>How Labor Markets Work: Reflections on Theory and Practice by John Dunlop, Clark Kerr, Richard Lester and Lloyd Reynolds</em>, Lexington Books, Lexington, 1988, pp.&#160;77-79.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Slichter, Sumner Huber (1892-1959)”, en John Eatwell, Murray Milgate y Peter Newman (eds.), <em>The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics</em>, 4 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1987, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, p.&#160;355.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Structural Changes in the American Labor Movement and Industrial Relations System”, en L. R. Tripp (ed.), <em>Pro<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page355" title="355"/>ceedings of the Ninth Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research Association, 1956</em>, The Association, Madison, 1957, pp.&#160;12-32.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dunlop, John T., “The Development of Labor Organization: A Theoretical Framework”, en Richard A. Lester y Joseph Shister (eds.), <em>Insights into Labor Issues</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1948, pp.&#160;179-185. Dunlop, John T., “The Function of the Strike” en John T. Dunlop y Neil W. Chamberlain (eds.), <em>Frontiers of Collective Bargaining</em>, Harper &amp; Row, Nueva York, 1967, pp.&#160;111-116.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Movement of Real and Money Wage Rates”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLVIII</span>, núm.&#160;191, septiembre de 1938, pp.&#160;413-434.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Task of Contemporary Wage Theory”, en John T. Dunlop (ed.), <em>The Theory of Wage Determnination</em>, St. Martin’s, Nueva York, 1957, p.&#160;8.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Wage Policies of Trade Unions”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, suplemento, parte 2, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXII</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1942, pp.&#160;290-301.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Industrial Relations System</em>, ed. revisada, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Management of Labor Unions: Decisions Making with Historical Constraints</em>, Lexington Books, Lexington, 1990, pp.&#160;26-51.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Wage Determination under Trade Unions</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1944.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dunn, Robert W., <em>Labor and Automobiles</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Dunne, William F., “O stachechnoi strategii”, <em><span class="versalitas bajas">III</span> Kongress</em>, pp.&#160;225-232.</p>
    <p class="frances">Durand, Claude, <em>Conscience ouvrière et action syndicale</em>, Mouton, París, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Pierre Dubois, <em>La grève: enquête sociologique</em>, Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, París, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Durkheim, Émile, <em>De la division du travail social: Étude sur l’organisation des sociétés supérieures</em>, Félix Alcan, París, 1893.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page356" title="356"/>Eaton, John, Michael Barratt Brown y Ken Coates, <em>Economic Strategy for the Labour Movement: An Alternative</em>, The Spokesman, Nottingham, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Eckstein, Gustav, “Was bedeutet der Generalstreik?”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/I</span>, núm.&#160;12, 16 de diciembre de 1903, pp.&#160;357-363.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Eckstein, Susan, <em>The Poverty of Revolution: The State and the Urban Poor in Mexico</em>, Pricenton University, Princeton, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Edgeworth, Francis Y., “Higgling”, en Robert H. I. Palgrave (ed.), <em>Dictionary of Political Economy</em>, 3 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1910, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;304-305.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “La teoria pura del monopolio”, <em>Giornale degli economisti</em>, segunda serie, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, núms.&#160;1, 4, 5, julio, octubre y noviembre de 1897.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Theory of Distribution”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, 2, febrero de 1904, p.&#160;217, n.&#160;2.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Mathematical Psychics: An Essay on the Application of Mathematics to the Moral Sciences</em>, C. Kegan Paul &amp; Co., Londres, 1881.</p>
    <p class="frances">Edwards, E. J., “The Great Railroad Builders”, <em>Munsey’s Magazine</em>, febrero de 1903, pp.&#160;645.</p>
    <p class="frances">Edwards, Richard, <em>Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in the Twentieth Century</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ehmer, J., “Work, History of”, en Neil J. Smelser y Paul B. Baltes (eds.), <em>International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences</em>, 26 vols., Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2001, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, pp.&#160;16569-16574.</p>
    <p class="frances">Eldridge, John E. T., <em>Industrial Disputes: Essays in the Sociology of Industrial Relations</em>, Routledge amd Kegan Paul, Londres, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Elster, Jon, “Rationality, Economy and Society”, en Stephen Turner (ed.), <em>The Cambridge Companion to Weber</em>, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000, pp.&#160;38-40.</p>
    <p class="frances">Engels, Friedrich, “Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England: Nach eigner Anschauung und authentischen Quellen [1844]”, en Marx y Engels, <em>Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;306, 314-315.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page357" title="357"/>Engels, Friedrich, “Einleitung [a Karl Marx, ‘Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850’ (1895)]”, en Marx y Engels, <em>Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXII</span>, pp.&#160;513 y 522.</p>
    <p class="frances">—,“Einleitung zum Neudruck von Marx’ ‘Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848-1850’”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Einleitung”, en Karl Marx, <em>Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich, 1848 bis 1850: Abdruck aus der “Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung”, politisch-ökonomische Revue, Hamburg 1850</em>, Vorwärts, Berlín, 1895, pp.&#160;8-23.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Von der Autorität [1872-1873]”, <em>Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, pp.&#160;305-308.</p>
    <p class="frances">Erard, Zinaïda y G. M. Zygier, eds., <em>La Pologne: une société en dissidence</em>, François Maspero, París, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Etzioni, Amitai, <em>A Comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations: On Power, Involvement and Their Correlates</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fantasia, Rick, <em>Cultures of Solidarity: Consciousness, Action and Contemporary American Workers</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Kim Voss, <em>Hard Work: Remaking the American Labor Movement</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">Farber, Henry S., “Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The Case of the United Mine Workers” [1978], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Analysis of Union Behavior”, en Orley Ashenfelter <em>et al</em>. (eds.), <em>Handbook of Labor Economics</em>, 3 vols. en 5, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam, 1986-1999, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Determination of the Union Status of Workers” [1983], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Farnsworth-Alvear, Ann, “Talking, Fighting, Flirting: Workers’ Sociability in Medellín Textile Mills, 1935-1950”, en John D. French y Daniel James, (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page358" title="358"/>Farnsworth-Alvear, Ann, <em>Dulcinea in the Factory: Myth, Morals, Men, and Women in Colombia’s Industrial Experiment, 1905-1960</em>, Duke University, Durham, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Faue, Elizabeth, <em>Community of Suffering and Struggle: Women, Men, and the Labor Movement in Minneapolis, 1915-1945</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fayol, Henri, <em>Administration industrielle et générale</em>, Dunod, París, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Feagin, Joe R. y Harlan Hahn, <em>Ghetto Revolts: The Politics of Violence in American Cities</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fellner, William J., <em>Competition among the Few: Oligopoly and Similar Market Structures</em>, Knopf, Nueva York, 1949.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fendrich, Anton, <em>Der Stellungskrieg bis zur Frühlingsschlacht (1915) in Flandern</em>, Franckh, Stuttgart, 1916.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fenichel, Otto, “On the Psychology of Boredom [Langeweile] [1934]”, en Fenichel, Otto, <em>Collected Papers</em>, 2 vols., W. W. Norton, Nueva York, 1953-1954, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;292-302.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ferguson, Niall, “Virtual History: Towards a ‘Chaotic’ Theory of the Past”, en Ferguson, Niall (ed.), <em>Virtual History: Alternatives and Counterfactuals</em>, Picador, Londres, 1997, pp.&#160;1-90.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fillieule, Olivier, <em>Stratégies de la rue: Les manifestations en France</em>, Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, París, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Filtzer, Donald, <em>Soviet Workers and Stalinist Industrialization: The Formation of Modern Soviet Production Relations, 1928-1941</em>, Pluto Press, Londres, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fine, Sidney, <em>Sit-Down: The General Motors Strike of 1936-1937</em>, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Finer, Samuel E., “The Unions and Power”, <em>New Society</em>, 6 de febrero, 1975, pp.&#160;329-330. </p>
    <p class="frances">Fink, Leon, “Editor’s Introduction”, <em>Labor History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLIII</span>, 3, agosto de 2002, pp.&#160;245-246.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Brian Greenberg, <em>Upheaval in the Quiet Zone: A History of Hospital Workers’s Union, Local 1199</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Notes and Documents: What is to be Done in Labor History?”, <em>Labor History.</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLIII</span>, 4, noviembre de 2002, pp.&#160;419-424.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page359" title="359"/>Fink, Leon (ed.), <em>Labor: Studies in Working Class History of the Americas</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, primavera de 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Maya of Morganton: Work and Community in the Nuevo New South</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 2003.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fisher, Lloyd H., <em>The Harvest Labor Market in California</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1953.</p>
    <p class="frances">Flanders, Allan D., <em>The Fawley Productivity Agreements: A Case Study of Management and Collective Bargaining</em>, Faber and Faber, Londres, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fletcher, Bill, Jr. y Richard Hurd, “Is Organizing Enough? Race, Gender and Union Culture”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, núm.&#160;6, primavera de 2000, pp.&#160;59-69.</p>
    <p class="frances">Flüchtig, U., “Zur Frage des Generalstreiks”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/I</span>, núm.&#160;14, 31 de diciembre de 1903, pp.&#160;445-448.</p>
    <p class="frances">Flynt, Bill, “Threat Convergence”, <em>Military Review</em>, septiembre-octubre de 1999, pp.&#160;2-11.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Y2K Strategies for Managing Interdependency Among Industry Sectors”, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.y.2k.gov/docs/infraestructure.htm"><em>www.y.2k.gov/docs/infraestructure.htm</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Foa, Vittorio, “Lotte operaie nello sviluppo capitalistico [1961]”, <em>Quaderni Rossi</em>, reimpresión, 6 vols., Nuove Nuove Edizioni Operaie, Roma, 1976-1978, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;1-17.</p>
    <p class="frances">Foch, Ferdinand, <em>De la conduite de la guerre: La manoeuvre pour la bataille</em> [1904], Nancy, Berger-Levrault, París, 1915, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Des principes de la guerre</em> [1903], Imprimerie Nationale, París, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Follett, Mary P., <em>Creative Experience</em>, Longmans, Green &amp; Co., Nueva York, 1924</p>
    <p class="frances">Foner, Philip S. y Brewster Chamberlin (eds.), <em>Friedrich A. Sorge’s Labor Movement in the United States [1891-1895]: A History of the American Working Class from Colonial Times to 1890</em>, traducción al inglés de Brewster Chamberlin y Angela Chamberlin, Greenwood Press, Westport, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Forest G. Hill, <em>Roads, Rails &amp; Waterways: The Army Engineers and Early Transportation</em>, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page360" title="360"/>Forney, Matthias N., <em>Catechism of the Locomotive</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed. revisada y aumentada, Railroad Gazette, Nueva York, 1891.</p>
    <p class="frances">Foster, William Z., <em>A Manual of Industrial Unionism: Organizational Structure and Policies</em>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>American Trade Unionism: Principles and Organization, Strategy and Tactics: Selected Writings</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>From Bryan to Stalin</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>History of the Communist Party of the United States</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1952.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Industrial Unionism</em>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Organize the Unorganized</em>, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Organizing Methods in the Steel Industry</em>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Problems of Organized Labor Today</em>, New Century, Nueva York, 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Strike Strategy</em>, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Great Steel Strike and Its Lessons</em>, B.W. Huebsch, Nueva York, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Unionizing Steel</em>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>What Means A Strike in Steel</em>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fox, Alan, <em>A Sociology of Work in Industry</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fox, John B. y Jerome F. Scott, <em>Absenteeism: Management’s Problem</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1943.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frank, Dana, <em>Purchasing Power: Consumer Organizing, Gender, and the Seattle Labor Movement, 1919-1929</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frank, Lawrence F., “The Signifi cance of Industrial Integration”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIII</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Franzosi, Roberto, <em>The Puzzle of Strikes: Class and State Strategies in Postwar Italy</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page361" title="361"/>Fraser, Ronald, ed., <em>Work: Twenty Personal Accounts</em>, 2 vols., Penguin, Londres, 1968-1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frederico, Celso, <em>Consciencia operaria no Brasil: estudo com um grupo de trabalhadores</em>, Atica, Sao Paulo, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Freeman, Joshua B., <em>In Transit: The Transport Workers Union in New York City, 1933-1966</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Working-Class New York: Life and Labor Since World War II</em>, New Press, Nueva York, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Freeman, Richard, “The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job Tenure, Quits, and Separations” [1980], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Freeman, Richard B., “Contraction and Expansion: The Divergence of Private Sector and Public Sector, Unionism in the United States”, <em>Journal of Economic Perspectives</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;2, primavera de 1988, p.&#160;82.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y James L. Medoff, <em>What Do Unions Do?</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor Economics</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">French, John D. y Daniel James, “Oral History, Identity Formation, and Working-Class Mobilization”, en John D. French y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, p.&#160;310.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Daniel James, “Squaring the Circle: Women’s Factory Labor, Gender, Ideology, and Necessity”, en John D. French y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Mary Lynn Pedersen Cluff, “Women and WorkingClass Mobilization in Postwar São Paulo, 1945-1948”, en John D. French y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of La<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page362" title="362"/>tin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;176-207.</p>
    <p class="frances">French, John D., “The Latin American Labor Studies Boom”, <em>International Review of Social History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLV</span>, 2, agosto de 2000, pp.&#160;289-293.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Brazilian Workers’ abc: Class Conflict and Alliances in Modern São Paulo</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">French, William E., “Imagining and the Cultural History of Nineteenth-Century Mexico”, <em>Hispanic Amrican Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 2, mayo de 1999, pp.&#160;249-267.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>A Peaceful and Working People: Manners, Morals, and Class Formation in Northern Mexico</em>, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frenkel, Stephen J. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>On the Front Line: Organization of Work in the Information Economy</em>, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Freyssenet, Michel, <em>La division capitaliste du travail</em>, Savelli, París, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Friedland, Jonathan, “Power Play”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 3 de diciembre de 1999, pp.&#160;A<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, A8.</p>
    <p class="frances">Friedlander, Peter, <em>The Emergence of a  <span class="versalitas bajas">UAW</span> Local, 1936-1939: A Study in Class and Culture</em>, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Friedman, Andrew, <em>Industry and Labour: Class Struggle at Work and Monopoly Capitalism</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Friedmann, George, <em>La crise du progrès: esquisse d’histoire des idées (1895-1935)</em>, Gallimard, París, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Où va le travail humain?</em>, Gallimard, París, 1950.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Problèmes du machinisme en U.R.S.S. et dans les pays capitalistes</em>, Éditions Sociales Internationales, París, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Problémes humains du machinisme industriel</em>, Gallimard, París, 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Pierre Naville (eds.), <em>Traité de sociologie du travail</em>, 2 vols., Armand Colin, París, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Friedman, Lawrence, “Decision Making in Competitive Situations”, <em>Management Technologies</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;1, diciembre de 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page363" title="363"/>Friedman, Samuel R., “Changes in the Trucking Industry and the Teamsters Union: The Bonapartism of Jimmy Hoffa”, <em>The Insurgent Sociologist</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núms.&#160;2 y 3, otoño de 1978, <span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núms.&#160;2 y 3, otoño de 1978, pp.&#160;52-62.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Teamster Rank and File: Power, Bureaucracy, and Rebellion at Work in a Union</em>, Columbia University, Nueva York, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frisch, Ragnar, “Annual Survey of General Economic Theory: The Problem of Index Numbers”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1936, pp.&#160;14.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Monopole-polypole-La notion de force dans l’économie”, <em>Nationalokonomisk Tidsskrift, Tillaegshefte: Til Harald Westergaard</em>, 19 de abril de 1933, núm.&#160;71, 1933, pp.&#160;243-253.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic Economics”, en <em>Economic Essays in Honor of Gustav Cassel</em>, October 20th 1933, George Allen &amp;  Unwin, Londres, 1933, pp.&#160;181-205.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Theory of Production</em>, traducción al inglés de R. I. Christophersen, Rand McNally, Chicago, 1965, 135-143.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frost, Robert L., “Labor and Technological Innovation in French Electrical Power”, <em>Technology and Culture</em>, pp.&#160;865-887.</p>
    <p class="frances">Frutcher, Norm <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “Chicago: join Project”, <em>Studies on the Left</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;3, verano de 1965, pp.&#160;107-125.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Robert Kramer, “An Approach to Community Organizing Projects”, <em>Studies on the Left</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;2, marzo-abril de 1966, pp.&#160;31-61.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fuchs, James R., “Oral History Interviews with David A. Morse”, 25 y 30 de julio y 3 de agosto de 1977, Truman Presidential Museum and Library, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.trumanlibrary.org/oralhist/morse.htm"><em>www.trumanlibrary.org/oralhist/morse.htm</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger, James M. Poterba, “Economists’ Views about Parameters, Values and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics”, <em>Journal of Economic Literature</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, núm.&#160;3, septiembre de 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gaboury, Fred, “Auto Strike Over! GM Workers Win”, <em>People’s Weekly World</em>, 1° de agosto de 1998.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Galbraith, John Kenneth, “The Strategy of Direct Control in Eco<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page364" title="364"/>nomic Mobilization”, <em>Review of Economics and Statistics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIII</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances">Galbraith, John Kenneth, <em>The New Industrial State</em>, Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gallatin, Albert, “Roads and Canals”, 4 de abril de 1808, en Walter Lowrie <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>American State Papers: Commerce and Navigation, Military Affairs</em>, Miscellaneous, 38 vols. Gales and Sealon, Washington D. C., 1833-1861.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gallie, Duncan, <em>In Search of the New Working Class: Automation and Social Integration within the Capitalist Enterprise</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gamboa Ojeda, Leticia, <em>La urdimbre y la trama: historia social de los obreros textiles de Atlixco, 1899-1924</em>, fce, México, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gamson, William A., <em>The Strategy of Social Protest</em>, Homewood, Dorsey, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gans, Herbert, <em>The Urban Villagers: Group and Class in the Life of Italian-Americans</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gardner, Burleigh B., <em>Human Relations in Industry</em>, Homewood, R.D. Irwin, 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gartman, David, <em>Auto Slavery: The Labor Process in the American Automobile Industry, 1897-1950</em>, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Garza Toledo, Enrique de la, <em>Reestructuración productiva y respuesta sindical en México</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">UNAM</span>, México, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gastev, Aleksei K., <em>Kak nado rabotat’: Prakticheskoe vvedenie v nauky organizatsii truda</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Ekonomika, Moscú, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances"><em>Génesis 1-3</em>, versión en español de Casiodoro de Reina y Cipriano de Valera, Editorial Vida, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Genovese, Eugene D., “On Antonio Gramsci”, <em>Studies on the Left</em>, 7, marzo-abril de 1967, pp.&#160;83-108.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, (ed.) y Warren I. Susman (presidente del consejo editorial), <em>Marxist Perspectives: A Quarterly of History and Cultural Criticism, 1978-1980</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">George, Henry, <em>The Condition of Labor: An Open Letter to Pope Leo XIII</em>, United States Book Company, Nueva York, 1891.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page365" title="365"/>Germain, E., “La révolution politique en Pologne et en Hongrie”, <em>Quatrième Internationale</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>, diciembre de 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Occupations d’usine et mouvements agraires en Italie”, <em>Quatrième Internationale</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, diciembre de 1949-enero de 1950, pp.&#160;25-26.</p>
    <p class="frances">Germani, Gino, <em>Política y sociedad en una época de transición: De la sociedad tradicional a la sociedad de masas</em>, Paidós, Buenos Aires, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gerstle, Gary, <em>Working-Class Americanism: The Politics of Labor in a Textile City, 1914-1960</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Giap, Vo Nguyen, <em>People’s War, People’s Army</em>, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Hanoi, 1974, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">Giddens, Anthony, <em>The Class Structure of the Advanced Societies</em>, Hutchinson, Londres, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Giles, Anthony, “Industrial Relations at the Millennium: Beyond Employment?”, <em>Labour/Le Travail</em>, núm.&#160;46, otoño de 2000, pp.&#160;36-67.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gindin, Sam, “Notes on Labor at the End of the Century: Starting Over?”, en Ellen M. Wood <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Rising from the Ashes? Labor in the Age of Global Capitalism,</em>, Monthly Review, Nueva York, 1998, pp.&#160;197-201</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Socialism ‘with Sober Senses’: Developing Workers’ Capacities”, en Leo Panitch y Colin Leys (eds.), <em>The Socialist Register 1998: The Communist Manifesto Now</em>, Merlin, Londres, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ginzburg, Louis, <em>The Legends of the Jews [1909]</em>, traducción al inglés de Henrietta Szold, 5 vols., Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Glazer, Nathan y Daniel p.&#160;Moynihan, <em>Beyond the Melting Pot: The Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians and the Irish of New York City</em>, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Goffman, Erving, <em>Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-to-Face Behavior</em>, Anchor, Garden City, 1967</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page366" title="366"/>Goffman, Erving, <em>Strategic Interaction</em>, University of Pennsylvania, Filadelfia, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Golden, Clinton S. y Harold J. Ruttenberg, <em>The Dynamics of Industrial Democracy</em>, Harper &amp;  Brothers, Nueva York, 1942.</p>
    <p class="frances">Goldthorpe, John H. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>The Affluent Worker</em>, 3 vols., Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gómez-Galvarriato, Aurora, “Measuring the Impact of Institutional Change in Capital-Labor Relations in the Mexican Textile Industry, 1900-1930”, en Jeffrey L. Bortz y Stephen Haber (eds.), <em>The Mexican Economy, 1870-1930: Essays on the Economic History of Institutions, Revolution and Growth</em>, Stanford University, Stanford, 2002, pp.289-323.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gompers, Samuel, <em>Seventy Years of Life and Labor: An Autobiography</em>, 2 vols., E. p.&#160;Dutton &amp;  Co., Nueva York, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Goodman, Robert, <em>After the Planners</em>, Simon &amp;  Schuster, Nueva York, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Goodrich, Carter L., <em>The Frontier of Control: A Study in British Workshop Politics</em>, Harcourt Brace, Nueva York, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gordillo, Mónica B., <em>Córdoba en los ‘60. La experiencia del sindicalismo combativo</em>, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gordon, Andrew, <em>The Evolution of Labor Relations in Japan: Heavy Industry, 1853-1955</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gordon, Robert A., <em>Business Leadership in the Large Corporation</em>, Brookings Institution, Washington D. C., 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gorter, Herman, “Der Massenstreik der Eisenbahner in Holland”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI/I</span>, núm.&#160;21, 18 de febrero de 1903, pp.&#160;652-656.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gorz, André, <em>Stratégie ouvrière et néocapitalisme</em>, Seuil, París, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gouldner, Alvin W., <em>Patterns of Industrial Bureaucracy</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Wildcat Strike: A Study in Worker-Management Relationships</em>, Antioch Press, Yellow Springs, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gramsci, Antonio, <em>El materialismo histórico y la filosofía de Benedotto Croce</em>, traducción de Isidoro Flaumbaum, Juan Pablos, México, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page367" title="367"/>Gramsci, Antonio, <em>Quaderni del carcere</em>, 4 vols., Giuglio Einaudi Editore, Turín, 1975, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Scritti, 1915-1921</em>, Moizzi Editore, Milán, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Granovetter, Mark y Charles Tilly, “Inequality and Labor Processes” en <em>Handbook of Sociology</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Toward a Sociological Theory of Income Differences” en Ivar Berg (ed.), <em>Sociological Perspectives on Labor Markets</em>, Academic Press, Nueva York, 1981, pp.&#160;11-47.</p>
    <p class="frances">Grazia, Sebastian de, <em>Of Time, Work, and Leisure</em>, Twentieth-Century Fund, Nueva York, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Green, Venus, <em>Race on the Line: Gender, Labor, and Technology in the Bell System, 1880-1980</em>, Duke University, Durham, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">Greenberg, Brian, ed., “Labor History and Public History”, número especial de <em>The Public Historian</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, 4, otoño de 1989, pp.&#160;6-190.</p>
    <p class="frances">Greenhouse, Steven, “John Dunlop, 89, Dies; Labor Expert Served <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> Presidents”, <em>New York Times</em>, 4 de octubre de 2003, p.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Greenson, Ralph R., “On Boredom”, <em>Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, enero de 1953, pp.&#160;7-21.</p>
    <p class="frances">Griffin, Clare E., “Wholesale Organization in the Automobile Industry”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 1925, p.&#160;427.</p>
    <p class="frances">Griffith, Barbara S., <em>The Crisis of American Labor: Operation Dixie and the Defeat of the  <span class="versalitas bajas">CIO</span></em>, Temple University, Filadelfia, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Grimm, Jacob y Wilhelm Grimm, <em>Deutsches Wörterbuch</em>, 16 vols. en 32, S. Hirzel, Leipzig, 1854-1971, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span></p>
    <p class="frances">Grodinsky, Julius, <em>Transcontinental Railway Strategy, 1869-1893: A Study of Businessmen</em>, University of Pennsylvania, Filadelfia, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Groschopp, Horst, “Rühle, Karl Heinrich Otto”, <em>Lexikon sozialistischer Literatur: Ihre Geschichte in Deutschland bis 1945</em>, Metzler, Stuttgart, 1994, pp.&#160;406-407.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gruenberg, Gladys W. <em>et al</em>., <em>The National Academy of Arbitrators: Fifty Years in the World of Work</em>, Bureau of National Affairs, Washington, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Guha, Ranajit, “Preface”, en <em>Selected Subaltern Studies</em>, p.&#160;35.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page368" title="368"/>Guha, Ranajit, y Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, eds., <em>Selected Subaltern Studies</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Guilbert, Madeleine, <em>Les fonctions des femmes dans l’industrie</em>, Mouton, París, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Gutman, Herbert G., “Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America, 1815-1919”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXVIII</span>, 3, junio de 1973, pp.&#160;531-588.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Work, Culture, and Society in Industrializing America: Essays in American Working-Class and Social History</em>, A. A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Guyer, Linda, “Organizing in Cyberspace”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, primavera de 2003, pp.&#160;33-42.</p>
    <p class="frances">Habermas, Jürgen, <em>Technik und Wissenschaft als “Ideologie”</em>, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hainz, Otto, “Vorrede zur Neuausgabe der ersten vier Bände”, en Delbrück, Hans, <em>Krieg und Politik, 1914-1916</em>, 3 vols., Georg Stilke, Berlín, 1918, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Halbwachs, Maurice, <em>Les cadres sociales de la mémoire</em>, Félix Alcan, París, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hall, Jacquelyn D. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Like a Family: The Making of a Southern Cotton Mill World</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hall, John R., “Cultural History is Dead (Long Live the Hydra)”, en Gerard Delanty y Engin F. Isin (eds.), <em>Handbook of Historical Sociology</em>, Sage, Londres, 2003, pp.&#160;151-167.</p>
    <p class="frances">Halle, David, <em>America’s Working Man: Work, Home and Politicians among Blue-Collar Workers</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Halttunen, Karen, “Self, Subject, and the ‘Barefoot Historian’”, <em>Journal of American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXXIX</span>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, junio de 2002, pp.&#160;20-24.</p>
    <p class="frances">Handlin, Oscar <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Harvard Guide to American History</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Haney, Lewis H., “Advantages and Disadvantages of Railway Consolidation”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, marzo de 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page369" title="369"/>Haraszti, Miklós, <em>A Worker in a Worker’s State</em>, traducción al inglés de Michael Wright, Universe Books, Nueva York, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Harbison, Frederick H., “Steel”, <em>How Collective Bargaining Works</em>, Twentieth Century Fund, Nueva York, 1942, pp.&#160;517-523</p>
    <p class="frances">— y John R. Coleman, <em>Goals and Strategy in Collective Bargaining</em>, Harper &amp;  Brothers, Nueva York, 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hareven, Tamara K. y Randolph Langenbach, <em>Amoskeag: Life and Work in an American Factory-City</em>, Pantheon, Nueva York, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Harris, Abram L., “Economic Evolution: Dialectic and Darwinian”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLII</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Harris, Rosemary, <em>Power and Powerlessness in Industry: An Analysis of the Social Relations of Production</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Harvey, David, <em>The Limits to Capital</em>, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hassard, John, <em>Sociology and Organization Theory: Positivism, Paradigms and Postmodernity</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Haydu, Jeffrey, <em>Between Craft and Class: Skilled Workers and Factory Politics in the United States and Britain, 1890-1922</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hayward, Harrison W., “Mechanics of Rigid Bodies” en Lionel S. Marks (ed.), <em>Mechanical Engineers’ Handbook</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1916, pp.&#160;188-222.</p>
    <p class="frances">Haywood, William D. y Frank Bohn, <em>Industrial Socialism</em>, Clark H. Kerr, Chicago, 1911.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Bill Haywood’s Book: The Autobiography of William D. Haywood</em> [1929], International Publishers, Nueva York, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Heinrich von Thünen, <em>Johann, Der isolierte in Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft und Nationalökonomie</em> [1826], Akademie-Verlag, Berlín, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Helmholtz, Herman L. F., “On the Interaction of Natural Forces”, traducción al inglés de John Tyndall, en Edward L. Youmans (ed.), <em>The Correlation and Conservation of Forces: A Series of Expositions</em>, D. Appleton and Co., Nueva York, 1865.</p>
    <p class="frances">Helmholtz, Hermann von, <em>Über die Wechselwirkung der Naturkräfte und die darauf bezüglichen neuesten Ermittelungen der Physik: Ein <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page370" title="370"/>populär-wissenschaftlicher Vortrag gehalten am 7 februar 1854</em>, Gräfe &amp;  Unzer, Königsberg, 1854.</p>
    <p class="frances">Helphand, Alexander, <em>Technische Organisation der Arbeit (“Cooperation und Arbeitsteilung”): Eine kritische Studie</em>, tesis de doctorado.</p>
    <p class="frances">Helvey, Robert, <em>On Strategic Nonviolent Conflict: Thinking About the Fundamentals</em>, Albert Einstein Institution, Boston, 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">Henderson, L. J., “Pareto’s Science of Society”, <em>Saturday Review of Literature</em>, 25 de mayo de 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Science of Human Conduct: An Estimate of Pareto and One of His Greatest Works”, <em>The Independent: A Weekly Journal of Free Opinion</em>, Boston, 10 de diciembre de 1927, pp.&#160;575-577.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Elton Mayo, “The Effects of Social Environment”, <em>Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, núm.&#160;7, septiembre de 1936, pp.&#160;401-416.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Pareto’s General Sociology: A Physiologist’s Interpretation</em>, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Henrichs, Peter, <em>Um die Seele des Arbeiters: Arbeitspsychologie, Industrie—, und Betriebssoziologie in Deutschland, 1871-1945</em>, Pahl-Rugenstein, Colonia, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Herclet, A., “Zur Frage der Streikstrategie”, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts—, Internationale</em>, núm.&#160;12 (35), diciembre de 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">Herf, Jeffrey, <em>Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich</em>, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Herod, Andrew (ed.), <em>Organizing the Landscape: Geographical Perspectives on Labour Unionism</em>, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor Geographies: Workers and the Landscapes od Capitalism</em>, Guilford, Nueva York, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">Heron, Craig, <em>Working in Steel: The Early Years in Canada, 1883-1935</em>, McClelland &amp;  Stewart, Toronto, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Héthy, Lajos, <em>Organizational Conflict and Cooperation: A Theoretical Approach Illustrated by a Case Study from the Hungarian Construction Industry</em>, Akadémiai Kiadó, Budapest, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page371" title="371"/>Heuss, Theodor, <em>Friedrich Naumann: Der Mann, das Werk, die Zeit</em>, Rainer Wunderlich/Hermann Leins, Stuttgart/Tubinga, 1949, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed. revisada, p.&#160;415.</p>
    <p class="frances">Heyl, Barbara S., “The Harvard ‘Pareto’ Circle”, <em>Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1968, pp.&#160;316-334.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hicks, John R., “Edgeworth, Marshall, and the Indeterminateness of Wages”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XL</span>, núm.&#160;158, junio de 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Theory of Wages</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1932. Hickson, David J., “A Convergence in Organization Theory”, en <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, núm.&#160;3, septiembre de 1966, pp.&#160;224-237.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “A Strategic Contingencies’ Theory of Intraorganizational Power”, en Mayer N. Zald (ed.), <em>Power in Organizations</em>, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, 1970, pp.&#160;97-143.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., “Operations Technology and Organization Structure: An Empirical Reappraisal”, en <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>, núm.&#160;3, septiembre de 1969, pp.&#160;378-397.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hildebrand, George H. y Garth L. Mangum, <em>Capital and Labor in American Copper, 1845-1990: Linkages between Product and Labor Markets</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hilferding, Rudolf, “Zur Frage des Generalstreiks”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/I</span>, núm.&#160;5, s. f., ¿28 de octubre?, 1903, pp.&#160;134-142.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hill, Stephen, <em>Competition and Control at Work: The New Industrial Sociology</em>, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hiller, E. T., <em>The Strike: A Study in Collective Action</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hinings, Christopher R. <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, “Structural Conditions of Intraorganizational Power”, <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1974, pp.&#160;22-44.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hinton, James, <em>The First Shop Stewards’ Movement</em>, Londres, George Allen &amp;  Unwin, 1973</p>
    <p class="frances">Hirschman, Albert O., <em>The Strategy of Economic Development</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page372" title="372"/>Hoare, Quintin y Geoffrey Nowell Smith (eds. y trads.), <em>Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio Gramsci</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hobsbawm, E. J., <em>Labouring Men: Studies in the History of Labour</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hodson, Randy y Teresa A. Sullivan, <em>The Social Organization of Work</em>, Wadsworth, Belmont, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Holmes, James Michael, <em>The Counterair Companion: A Short Guide to Air Superiority for Joint Force Commanders</em>, tesis de la School of Advanced Airpower Studies, Air University, Base de la Fuerza Aérea en Maxwell, Alabama, 1994, p.&#160;24.</p>
    <p class="frances">Holyoake, George J., <em>The History of Co-operation in England: Its Literature and Its Advocates</em>, 2 vols., Trübner &amp;  Co., Londres, 1875-1879.</p>
    <p class="frances">Homans, George C., <em>Coming to My Senses: The Autobiography of a Sociologist</em>, Transaction, New Brunswick, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Charles P. Curtis, Jr., <em>An Introduction to Pareto: His Sociology</em>—, Alfred A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Human Group</em>, Harcourt &amp;  Brace, Nueva York, 1950.</p>
    <p class="frances">Honig, Emily, <em>Sisters and Strategies: Women in the Shanghai Cotton Mills, 1919-1949</em>, Stanford University, Stanford, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hoover, Edgar M., Jr., <em>Economía geográfica</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">FCE</span>, México.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Location Theory and the Shoe and Leather Industries</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">Horowitz, Joel, <em>Argentine Unions, the State, and the Rise of Peron</em>, Institute of International Studies, Berkeley, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Horowitz, Roger, <em>“Negro and White, Unite and Fight!”: A Social History of Industrial Unionism in Meatpacking, 1930-1990</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Horvath, Steven M. y Elizabeth C. Horvath, <em>The Harvard Fatigue Laboratory: Its History and Contributions</em>, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hotelling, Harold, “Stability in Competition”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIX</span>, marzo de 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page373" title="373"/>Howe, Irving, y B. J. Widick, <em>The  UAW and Walter Reuther</em>, Random House, Nueva York, 1949.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Lewis Coser, “Images of Socialism”, <em>Dissent</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;2, primavera de 1954, pp.&#160;122-138.</p>
    <p class="frances">Howell, George, <em>The Confl icts of Capital and Labour Historically and Economically Considered: Being a History and Review of the Trade Unions of Great Britain</em>, Chatto &amp;  Windus, Londres, 1878.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hoxie, Robert F., <em>Trade Unionism in the United States </em>(suplemento de Mollie Ray Carroll), D. Appleton and Company, Nueva York, 1923, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hughes, Everett C., “The Sociological Study of Work: An Editorial Foreword”, <em>American Journal of Sociology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LVII</span>, núm.&#160;5, marzo de 1952, pp.&#160;423-426.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Men and Their Work</em>, Free Press, Glencoe, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Huizinga, Johan, <em>Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture</em>, Beacon, Boston, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Humphrey, John, <em>Capitalist Control and Workers’ Struggle in the Brazilian Auto Industry</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hurwicz, Leonid, “The Theory of Economic Behavior”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXV</span>, núm.&#160;5, diciembre de 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">Hyman, Richard, “Industrial Relations in Europe: Theory and Practice”, <em>European Journal of Industrial Relations</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1995, pp.&#160;17-46.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Industrial Relations: A Marxist Introduction</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Marxism and the Sociology of Trade Unionism</em>, Pluto, Londres, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Strikes</em>, Fontana, Londres, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Workers’ Union</em>, Clarendon, Oxford, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Industrial Union Department (<span class="versalitas bajas">AFL-CIO</span>), <em>The Inside Game: Winning with Workplace Strategies</em>, Industrial Union Department (<span class="versalitas bajas">AFL-CIO</span>), Washington, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Irving, Washington, <em>The Rocky Mountains: or, Scenes, Incidents, and Adventures in the Far West; digested from the journal of Capt. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page374" title="374"/> B.L.E. Bonneville</em>, 2 vols., Carey, Leas, and Blanchard, Filadelfia, 1837, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Isard, Walter, “The General Theory of Location and Space-Economy”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, noviembre de 1949, pp.&#160;504.</p>
    <p class="frances">y Caroline Isard, “Economic Implications of Aircraft”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LIX</span>, núm.&#160;2, febrero de 1943.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Transport Development and Building Cycles”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LVII</span>, núm.&#160;1, noviembre de 1942, pp.&#160;93, 95-96, 98, 101, 109.</p>
    <p class="frances"><em>IV Kongress Profinterna, 17 marta-3 aprelia 1928 g.: stenografi cheskii otchët, resoliutsii i postanovleniia</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jacoby, Sanford M., <em>Employing Bureaucracy: Managers, Unions, and the Trannsformation of Work in American Industry, 1900-1945</em>, Columbia University, Nueva York, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jacques, Martin y Francis Mulhern (eds.), <em>The Forward March of Labour Halted?</em>, New Left Books &amp;  Marxism Today, Londres, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jaffee, David, <em>Organization Theory: Tension and Change</em>, McGrawHill, Boston, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">James, C. L. R., <em>Notes on Dialectics: Hegel, Marx, Lenin</em> [1948], Lawrence Hill, Nueva York, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">James, Daniel, “‘Tales Told Out on the Borderlands’: Doña María’s Story, Oral History, and the Issues of Gender”, en John D. French y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;31-52.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Doña María’s Story: Storytelling, Personal Identity, and Community Narratives</em>, Duke University, Durham, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Resistance and Integration: Peronism and the Argentine Working Class, 1946-1976</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jaques, Elliot, <em>The Changing Culture of a Factory</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page375" title="375"/>Jeffreys, Steve, “France 1995: the backward march of labour halted?”, <em>Capital &amp;  Class</em>Capital &amp;  Class, núm.&#160;59, verano de 1996, pp.&#160;7-21.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jevons, William S., <em>The State in Relation to Labour</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1882.</p>
    <p class="frances">Johnson, J. R. [C. L. R. James], F. Forest [Raya Dunayevskaya] y Ria Stone [Grace Lee Boggs], <em>The Invading Socialist Society</em>, Johnson-Forest Tendency, Nueva York, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jones, Arnita A., “Public History Now and Then”, <em>The Public Historian</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, 3, verano de 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Reflections on the History Wars”, en George R. Garrison <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Beyond the Academy: A Scholar’s Obligations</em>, American Council of Learned Societies, Nueva York, 1995, pp.&#160;15-20.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jones, Bryn, “When Certainty Fails: Inside the Factory of the Future”, en Stephen Wood (ed.), <em>The Transformation of Work? Skill, Flexibility and the Labour Process</em>, Unwin Hyman, Londres, 1989, pp.&#160;44-58.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Michael Rose, “Re-dividing Labour: Factory Politics and Work Reorganisation in the Current Industrial Transition”, en Kate Purcell <em>et al</em>. (eds)., <em>The Changing Experience of Employment: Restructuring and Recession</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1986, pp.&#160;35-57.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y p.&#160;J. Scott, “Flexible Manufacturing Systems in Britain and the USA”, <em>New Technology, Work, and Employment</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;1, primavera de 1987, pp.&#160;27-36.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Stephen Wood, “Qualifications tacites, division du travail et nouvelles technologies”, <em>Sociologie du travail</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVI</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1984, pp.&#160;407-421.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Destruction or Redistribution of Engineering Skills: The Case of Numerical Control”, en Stephen Wood (ed.), <em>The Degradation of Work? Skill, Deskilling and the Labour Process</em>, Hutchinson, Londres, 1982, pp.&#160;170-200.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “New Production Technology and Work Roles: a Paradox of Flexibility versus Strategic Control?”, en Ray Loveridge y Martyn Pitt, <em>The Strategic Management of Technological Innovation</em>, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Chichester, 1990, pp.&#160;293-309.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page376" title="376"/>Jones, Bryn, “Technical, Organisation and Political Constraints on System Re-Design for Machinist Programming of NC Machine Tools”, en Ulrich Briefs <em>et al</em>. (eds.), <em>Systems Design for, with, and by the Users</em>, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1983, pp.&#160;95-105.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Forcing the Factory of the Future: Cybernation and Societal Institutions</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jones, Jacqueline, <em>American Work: Four Centuries of Black and White Labor</em>, W. W. Norton, Nueva York, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Jordan, Tim y Paul A. Taylor, <em>Hacktivism and Cyberwars: Rebels with a Cause?</em>, Routledge, Londres, 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">Joseph A. Schumpeter, <em>Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process</em>, 2 vols., McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1939.</p>
    <p class="frances">Joseph, Gilbert M., “Reclaiming ‘the Political’ at the Turn of the Millenium”, en Gilbert M. Joseph (ed.), <em>Reclaiming the Political in Latin American History</em>, Duke University, Durham, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Daniel Nugent, “Preface”, en <em>Everyday Forms</em>, p.&#160;xvi.</p>
    <p class="frances">Joyce, Patrick, Work, <em>Society and Politics: The Culture of the Factory in Later Victorian England</em>, Harvester, Brighton, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kalleberg, Arne L. e Ivar Berg, <em>Work and Industry: Structures, Markets and Processes</em>, Plenum, Nueva York, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kallen, Horace M., “Functionalism”, en Edwin R. A. Seligman (ed.), <em>Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences</em>, 15 vols., Macmillan, Nueva York, 1930-1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kámenev, L. B., “Chastichnye trebovaniia i revoliutsionnaia bor’ba [1913]” en Kámenev, L. B., <em>Mezhdu dvumia revoliutsiiami: sbnornik statei</em>, Novaia Moskva, Moscú, 1923, p.&#160;511.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kapferer, Bruce, <em>Strategy and Transaction in an African Factory: African Workers an Indian Management in a Zambian Town</em>, Manchester University, Manchester, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Karksi, F., “Ein Missverständnis”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIX/I</span>, núm.&#160;4, 28 de octubre de 1910, pp.&#160;101-102.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kaser, M.C., “Stramilin, Stanislav Gustavovich (1877-1974)”, <em>New Palgrave</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, p.&#160;534.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page377" title="377"/>Kassis, Hanna E., <em>A Concordance of the Qur’an</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">Katz, Daniel y Robert L. Kahn, <em>The Social Psychology of Organizations</em>, Wiley, Nueva York, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Katz, Wallace, “Don’t Mourn: Globalize!”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, núm.&#160;6, primavera de 2000, pp.&#160;7-20.</p>
    <p class="frances">Katznelson, Ira, “The Bourgeois Dimension: A Provocation About Institutions, Politics, and the Future of Labor History”, <em>International Labor and Working-Class History</em>, núm.&#160;46, otoño de 1994, pp.&#160;7-20.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kaufman, Bruce E., <em>The Origins &amp;  Evolution of the Field of Industrial Relations in the United States</em>, Ithaca, <span class="versalitas bajas">ILR</span>, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kautsky, Karl, “Allerhand Revolutionäres: <span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>. Der politische Massenstreik”, <em>Die soziale Revolution</em>, “Vorwärts” [Ch. Glocke], Berlín, 1902, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/I</span>, núm.&#160;22, 24 de febrero de 1904, pp.&#160;685-695.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Der Entwurf des neuen Parteiprogramme. <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">IX/2</span>, 31 de agosto de 1891, pp.&#160;752, 757.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Der jüngste Radikalismus”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXI/1</span>, núm.&#160;12, 20 de diciembre de 1912, pp.&#160;436-446.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eine neue Strategie”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;37, 10 de junio de 1910, pp.&#160;332-341.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Maurenbrecher und das Budget”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVII/1</span>, núm.&#160;2, 9 de octubre de 1908, p.&#160;45.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Schlusswort”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>xxviii/2, núm.&#160;47, 19 de agosto de 1910, pp.&#160;760-765.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Was nun?”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;28, 8 de abril de 1910, pp.&#160;33-40.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zwischen Baden und Luxemburg”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;45, 5 de agosto de 1910, pp.&#160;652-667.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Das Erfurter Programm in seinem grundsätzlichen Theil</em>, J. B. W. Dietz, Stuttgart, 1892,.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der politische Massenstreik: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Massenstreikdiskussionen innerhalb der deutschen Sozialdemocratie</em>, Vorwärts Paul Singer, Berlín, 1914.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page378" title="378"/>Kautsky, Karl, <em>Der Weg zur Macht: Politische Betrachtungen über das Hineinwachsen in die Revolution</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Vorwärts, Berlín, 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Class Struggle (Erfurt Program)</em>, traducción de William E. Bohn, Chicago, Clark H. Kerr, 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kazin, Michael, <em>Barons of Labor: The San Francisco Building Trades and Unions Power in the Progressive Era</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kealey, Gregory S., <em>Toronto Workers Respond to Industrial Capitalism, 1867-1892</em>, University of Toronto, Toronto, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Keeran, Roger, <em>The Communist Party and the Auto Workers Unions</em>, Indiana University, Bloomington, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kelley, Robin D. G., <em>Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists during the Great Depression</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kelly, John E., “‘Left-Wing’ Communism—An Infantile Disorder”, <em>Collected Works</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., <em>Dock Strike: Conflict and Restructuring in Britain’s Ports</em>, Avebury, Aldershot, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Chto takoe ‘Druz’ia Naroda’ i kak oni voiuiut protiv sotsialdemokratov? [Qué son los “Amigos del Pueblo” y cómo luchan contra los socialdemócratas (1894)]”, en John E. Kelly, <em>Dock Strike: Conflict and Restructuring in Britain’s Ports</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Detskaia bolezn’ ‘levizny’ v kommunizme [La enfermedad infantil del “izquierdismo” en el comunismo]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLI</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O ‘levom’ rebiachestve i o melkoburzhuaznostvi”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, pp.&#160;283-314.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Razvitie kapitalizma v Rossii [El desarrollo del capitalismo en Rusia (1896-99)]”, <em>Dock Strike: Conflict and Restructuring in Britain’s Ports</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Retsenziia: Parvus, Mirovoi rynok i sel’skokhoziaistvennyi krize… [Reseña: Parvus, la economía mundial y la crisis agrícola […] (1899)]”, <em>Dock Strike: Conflict and Restructuring in Britain’s Ports</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, pp.&#160;60-62.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page379" title="379"/>Kelly, John E., <em>Rethinking Industrial Relations: Mobilization,  Collectivism, and Long Waves</em>, Routledge, Londres, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Scientific Management, Job Redesign, and Work Performance</em>, Academic Press, Londres, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Trade Unions and Socialist Politics</em>, Verso, Londres, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Social Democracy and Anti-Communism: Allan Flanders and British Industrial Relations in the Early Post-war Period”, en Alan Campbell <em>et al</em>., (eds.), <em>British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics</em>, 2 vols., Ashgate, Aldershot, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kemble Baldwin, Clarence, “Hoisting and Conveying”, en Lionel S. Marks (ed.), <em>Mechanical Engineers' Handbook</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1916, p.&#160;1107).</p>
    <p class="frances">Kergoat, Danièle, <em>Bullerdor: L’histoire d’une mobilisation ouvrière</em>, Seuil, París, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kergoat, Jacques <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Le monde du travail</em>, La Découverte, París, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kern, Horst y Michael Schumann, <em>Industriearbeit und Arbeiterbewusstsein: Eine empirische Untersuchung über den Einfl uss der aktuellen technischen Entwicklung auf die industrielle Arbeit und das Arbeitsbewusstsein</em>, Europäische Verlagsanstalt, Frankfurt, 1970, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kerr, Clark <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Industrialism and Industrial Man</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kessler-Harris, Alice, “A New Agenda for American Labor History: A Gendered Analysis and the Question of Class”, en J. Carroll Moody y Alice Kessler-Harris (eds.), <em>Perspectives on American Labor History: The Problems of Synthesis</em>, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Cultural Locations: Positioning American Studies in the Great Debate”, <em>American Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, 3, septiembre de 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning Women in the United States</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Keynes, John Maynard, <em>The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page380" title="380"/>Kimeldorf, Howard, “Sources of Working-Class Insurgency: Politics and Longshore Unionism during the 1930’s”, en Maurice Zeitlin (ed.), <em>Insurgent Workers: Studies in the Origins of Industrial Unionism</em>, University of California, Los Ángeles, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Battling for American Labor: Wobblies, Craft Workers, and the Making of the Union Movement</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Reds or Rackets? The Making of Radical and Conservative Unions on the Waterfront</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kipp, Jacob W., “Mass Mobility, and the Red Army’s Road to Oper ational Art, 1918-1936”, Ft. Leavenworth, Foreign Military Studies Offi ce, 1988 o <a target="blank" href="http://call.army.mil/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/redopart.htm"><em>http://call.army.mil/fmso/fmsopubs/issues/redopart.htm</em></a> pp.&#160;1-25.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klaus, Köhnke C., <em>Der junge Simmel: in Theoriebeziehungen und sozialen Bewegungen</em>, Suhrkamp, Frankfurt de Main, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kleeck, Mary van, “Towards an Industrial Sociology”, en <em>American Sociological Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, núm.&#160;5, octubre de 1946, p.&#160;501.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klehr, Harvey <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>The Secret World of American Communism</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klein, Lawrence R., “Theories of Effective Demand and Employment”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LV</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klein, Maury, “The Strategy of Southern Railroads”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, abril de 1968, pp.&#160;1059.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kleinwächter, Friedrich, <em>Die Kartelle: Ein Betrag zur Frage der Organisation der Volkswirthschaft</em>, Wagner’schen Universitäts, Innsbruck, 1883.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klubock, Thomas M., “Morality and Good Habits: The Construction of Gender and Class in the Chilean Copper Mines, 1904-1951”, en John D. French y Daniel James, (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;232-263.</p>
    <p class="frances">Klubock, Thomas M., <em>Contested Communities: Class, Gender, and Politics in Chile’s El Teniente Copper Mine, 1904-1951</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page381" title="381"/>Knowles, Kenneth G. J. C., <em>Strikes—A Study in Industrial Conflict,with Special Reference to British Experience between 1911 and 1947</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1952.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kocka, Jürgen, “How Can One Make Labour History Interesting Again?”, <em>European Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">IX</span>, 2, mayo de 2001, pp.&#160;207 y 209.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “New Trends in Labour Movement Historiography: A Ger man Perspective”, <em>International Review of Social History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLII</span>, 1, abril de 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Koontz, Harold, “A Preliminary Statement of Principles of Planning and Control”, <em>Journal of the Academy of Management</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;1, abril de 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Management Theory Jungle Revised”, <em>The Academy of Management Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1980, pp&#160;175-187.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kornblum, William, <em>Blue Collar Community</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kornhauser, Arthur, Robert Dubin y Arthur M. Ross (eds.), <em>Industrial Conflict</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kozsak, George, <em>Katechismus der Einrichtung und des Betriebes der Locomotive: Eilzugs—, Personen—, und Gütterzugslocomotiven, Berglocomotive, Strassenlocomotive, Tramway-Locomotive, für Locomotivführer, Bahnbeamte, studierende technischer Fachschulen, sowie zur populären Belehrung für gebildete jedes Standes</em>, 6<sup>a</sup>. ed., Spielhagen &amp; Schurich, Viena, 1892, Ivan Time, Prakticheskii kurs parovykh mashin, 2 vols., San Petersburgo, A. Transhelia, 1886-1887.</p>
    <p class="frances">Krassnof, p.&#160;N., <em>Dall’aquila imperiale alla bandiera rossa</em>, Salani, Florencia, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kraus, Henry, <em>The Many &amp; the Few: A Chronicle of the Dynamic Auto Workers</em>, Plantin, Los Angeles, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kriesberg, Louis, “Industrial Sociology, 1945-55”, en Hans L. Zetterberg (ed.), <em>Sociology in the United States of America: A Trend Report</em>, <span class="versalitas">unesco</span>, París, 1956, pp.&#160;71-77</p>
    <p class="frances">Kriesi, Hanspeter <em>et al</em>., <em>New Social Movements in Western Europe: </em> <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page382" title="382"/><em>A Comparative Analysis</em>, University of Minnesota, Minnea-polis, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Krueger, Alan y Lawrence H. Summers, “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage Structure” [1988], en Orley Ashenfelter y Kevin F. Hallock (eds.), <em>Labor Economics</em>, 4 vols., E. Elgar, Aldershot, 1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kuhn, James W., “The Grievance Process”, en <em>Frontiers of Collective Bargaining</em>, pp.&#160;252-270.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Bargaining in Grievance Settlement: The Power of Industrial Work Groups</em>, Columbia University, Nueva York, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kuhn, Jeremy y Robert Wheeler, eds., <em>International Labor and Working Class History</em>, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kumazawa, Makoto, <em>Portraits of the Japanese Workplace: Labor Movements, Workers, and Managers</em> [1981], traducción al ingés de Andrew Gordon y Mikiso Hane, Westview, Boulder, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kusterer, Ken C., <em>Know-How on the Job: The Important Working Knowledge of “Unskilled Workers”</em>, Westview, Boulder, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kviatkovskii, N. A., “O boikote”, <em>Prakticheskoe rukovodstvo k obrabotke nefti i ee produktov</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Padenie Port-Artura”, <em>Prakticheskoe rukovodstvo k obrabotke nefti i ee produktov</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Protiv boicota”, <em>Prakticheskoe rukovodstvo k obrabotke nefti i ee produktov</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVI</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">-“Revoliutsionnye dni”, <em>Prakticheskoe rukovodstvo k obrabotke nefti i ee produktov</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Prakticheskoe rukovodstvo k obrabotke nefti i ee produktov</em>, 2<sup></sup>a ed., N. I. Volkov, Nizhnii Novgorod, 1902.</p>
    <p class="frances">Kwitny, Jonathan, <em>Endless Enemies: The Making of an Unfriendly World</em>, Congdon &amp; Weed, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lacoste, Yves, <em>La géographie, ça sert, d’abord, à faire la guerre</em>, François Maspero, París, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lahy, Jean-Maurice, <em>La sélection psychophysiologique des travailleurs: conducteurs de tramsways et d’autobus</em>, Dunod, París, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">Landauer, Carl, <em>Grundprobleme der funktionellen Verteilung des wirtschaftlichen Wertes</em>, Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page383" title="383"/>LLansburg, Richard H., <em>Industrial Management</em>, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Nueva York, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lanzardo, Dario, “Il trasporto della forza-lavoro nel processo capitalistico di produzione”, <em>Quaderni Rossi</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;191-201.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lanzillotti, Robert F., “Multiple Products and Oligopoly Strategy: A Development of Chamberlin’s Theory of Products”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXVIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, agosto de 1954.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lapides, Kenneth, <em>Marx’s Wage Theory in Historical Perspective: Its Origins, Development, and Interpretation</em>, Westport, Praeger, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lasch, Christopher, <em>The Culture of Narcissism: American Life in An Age of Diminishing Expectations</em>, W. W. Norton, Nueva York, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Laslett, John H. M., <em>Labor and the Left: A Study of Socialist and Radical Infl uence in the American Labor Movement, 1881-1924</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1970</p>
    <p class="frances">Lassalle, Ferdinand, “Über Verfassungswesen” [1862], en Ferdinand Lassalle, <em>Gesamtwerke</em>, 5 vols. reunidos en dos, Karl F. Pfau, Leipzig, 1899-1901.</p>
    <p class="frances">Launhardt, Carl Wilhelm Friedrich, “Kommerzielle Trassierung der Verkehrswege”, <em>Zeitschrift des Architekten-und Ingenieur-Vereins zu Hannover</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, 1872, pp.&#160;521-525.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lawrence, Paul R. y Jay W. Lorsch, <em>Organization and Environment: Managing Differentiation and Integration</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lazonick, William, “Organization Learning and International Competition: The Skill-Based Hypothesis”, en William Lazonick y Mary O’Sullivan (eds.), <em>Corporate Governance and Sustainable Prosperity</em>, Houndsmill, Palgrave, 2002.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Breaking of the American Working Class”, <em>Reviews in American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XVII</span>, 2, junio de 1989, pp.&#160;272-283.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Theory of Innovative Enterprise”, <em>International Encyclopedia of Business and Management</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, pp.&#160;3055-3076.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Theory of the market Economy and the Social Foundations of Innovative Enterprise”, <em>Economic and Industrial Democracy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 2003, pp.&#160;23-38.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page384" title="384"/>Lazonick, William, <em>Business Organization and the Myth of the Market Economy</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Mary O’Sullivan, “Corporate Governance and Corporate Employment: Is Prosperity Sustainable in the United States? [1997]”, documento de trabajo núm.&#160;183, Jerome Levy Economics Institute, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.levy.org"> <em>www.levy.org</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Le Goff, Jacques, <em>Pour une autre Moyen Age: Temps, travail et culture en Occident: 18 essais</em>, Gallimard, París, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Leduc, Gaston, <em>La théorie des prix de monopole</em>, Paul Roubaud, Aixen-Province, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lefebvre, Henri, <em>La production de l’espace</em>, Éditions Anthropos, París, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lefort, Claude, “L’expérience prolétarienne” [1952], en Claude, Lefort, <em>Éléments d’une critique de la bureaucratie</em>, Librairie Droz, Ginebra, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Le prolétariat et sa direction” [1952], en Claude, Lefort, <em>Éléments d’une critique de la bureaucratie</em>, Librairie Droz, Ginebra, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Leicht, Kevin T., Michael Wallace y Don S. Grant, II, “Union Presence, Class and Individual Earnings Inequality”, <em>Work and Occupation</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XX</span>, núm.&#160;4, noviembre de 1993, pp.&#160;429-451.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lembcke, Jerry, “Labor History’s ‘Synthesis Debate’”, p.&#160;159.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Why 50 Years? Working Class Formation and Long Economic Cycles”, <em>Science and Society</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LV</span>, 4, invierno de 1992, pp.&#160;417-445.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Labor’s Crisis and the Crisis of Labor Studies: Toward a Retheorized Sociology of Labor”, en Patrick McGuire y Donald McQuarie (eds.), <em>From the Left Bank to the Mainstream: Historical Debates and Contemporary Research in Marxist Sociology</em>, General Hall, Dix Hills, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Labor History’s ‘Synthesis Debate’: Sociological Interventions”, <em>Science and Society</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LIX</span>, núm.&#160;2, verano de 1995, pp.&#160;137-173.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y William Tattam, <em>One Union in Wood: A Political History <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page385" title="385"/>of the International Woodworkers</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lembcke, Jerry,, <em>Capitalist Development and Class Capacities: Marxist Theory and Union Orfganization</em>, Westport, Greenwood, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Labor History’s ‘Synthesis Debate’: Sociological Interventions”, <em>Science and Society</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LIX</span>, 2, verano de 1995, pp.&#160;137-169.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lenin, Vladimir I., “Rech’ na i Vserossiiskom uchreditel’nom s’ezde gornorabochikh”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XL</span>, p.&#160;292.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Doklad o novoi ekonomicheskoi politike 29 oktiabria”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;193-213.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Doklad o revoliutsii 1905 goda”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>, pp.&#160;312-315.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Doklad o taktike rkp 5 iiulia”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIV</span>, p.&#160;40.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Doklad ob ocherednykj zadachakh sovetskoi vlasti”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, p.&#160;260.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Doklad ob otnoshenii proletariata k melkoburzhuarznoi demokratii”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVII</span>, p.&#160;218.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Ekonomicheskoe soderzhanie narodnichestva i kritika ego v knige g. Struve (otrazhenie marksizma v burzhuaznoi literature”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, 5<sup>a</sup>. ed., 55 vols. con 3 índices, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1958-70, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, p.&#160;379.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eshchë raz o profsoiuzakh, o tekushchem momente i ob oshibkakh tt. Trotskogo i Bujarina”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXLII</span>, p.&#160;296.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Itogi diskussii o samoopredelenii [Resumen de la discusión sobre la autodeterminación (1916)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>, p.&#160;23.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Izbiratel’naia kampaniia v iv duma i zadachi revoliutsionnoi sotsial-demokratii [La campaña electoral de la cuarta Duma y las tareas de los socialdemócratas revolucionarios (1912)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, p.&#160;248.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page386" title="386"/>Lenin, Vladimir I., “Letter to American Workers”, <em>Collected Works</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII</span>, p.&#160;67.</p> 
    <p class="frances">—, “Lozhka dëgtia v bochke mëda”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLV</span>, pp.&#160;206-207.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Luchshe men’she, da luchshe”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLV</span>, pp.&#160;389-406.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Luchshe men’she, da luchshe”, <em>Pravda</em>, 4 de marzo de 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Marksizm i vosstanie”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIV</span>, p.&#160;247.</p>
    <p class="frances">, “Nekotorye itogi predvybornoi mobilizatsii”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, p.&#160;313.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Novaia ekonomicheskaia politika i zadachi politprosvetov: Doklad na ii Vserossiiskom s’ezde politprosvetov 17 oktiabria 1921 g.”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;155-175.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Novye sobytiia i starye voprosy [Nuevos acontecimientos y antiguas preguntas (1902)]”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, 5<sup>a</sup>. ed., 55 vols. con 3 índices, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1958-70, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, pp.&#160;61-62.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O dvukh liniiakh revolutsii [Sobre las dos líneas en la revolución (1915)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVII</span>, pp.&#160;76-78.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O karikature na marksizm i ob ‘imperialisticheskom ekonomizme [Una caricatura del marxismo y de la economía imperialista (1916)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O professional’nykh soiuzakh, o tekushchem momente i ob oshibkakh t. Trotskogo. Rech’na soedinennom zasedanii delegatov viii s’ezda Sovetov, chlenov vtssps i mgsps-chlenov rkp (b), 30 dekabria 1920 g.”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLII</span>, pp.&#160;202-226.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O statistike stachek v Rossii”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Otchët o politicheskoi deiatel’nosti Tsk <span class="versalitas bajas">RKP</span> (b) 8 marta”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIII</span>, p.&#160;11.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Otchët tsentral’nogo komiteta 18 marta”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, p.&#160;140.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Patsifizm burzhuazny i patsifizm sotsialisticheskii [Paci<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page387" title="387"/>fismo burgués y pacifismo socialista (1916)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>, p.&#160;248 (cita a un “reformista” italiano).</p>
    <p class="frances">Lenin, Vladimir I., “Piat’ let rossikoi revoliutsii i perspektivy mirovoi revoliutsii: Doklad na IV Kongresse Komiterna 13 noiabria”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLV</span>, pp.&#160;278-294.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Pis’mo k amerikanskim rabochim”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVII</span>, p.&#160;56.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Pis’mo k nemetskim kommunistam”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Pis’mo k tovarishchami [Carta a los camaradas (17 de octubre [30], 1917)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIV</span>, p.&#160;406.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Plany tezisov ‘o roli zadachakh profsoiuzov v usloviiakh novoi ekonomicheskoi politiki”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;494-500.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Politicheskaia stachka i ulichnaia bor’ba v Moskve”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, 5<sup>a</sup>. ed., 55 vols. con 3 índices, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1958-70, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, pp.&#160;346-348.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Proekt tezisov o roli i zadachakh profsoiuzov v usloviiakh novoi ekonomicheskoi politiki”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;341-353.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ na chrezvychainom vserossiiskom s’ezde zheleznodorozhnykh rabochikh i masterovykh, 13 (26) dekabria 1917 g. [Discurso ante el congreso extraordinario de ferrocarrileros, 13 de diciembre (26), 1917]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXV</span>, pp.&#160;167-168.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ na konferentsii zheleznodorozhnikov moskovskogo yzla 5 fevralia 1920 g. Discurso pronunciado en una asamblea de los trabajadores ferroviarios del entronque de Moscú, 5 de febrero de 1920)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XL</span>, p.&#160;111.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ na zasedanii peterburgskogo komiteta rsdrp(b) 11 (24) iuniia 1917 g. po povodu otmeny demonstratsii [Discurso […] sobre la cancelación de la manifestación (11 de junio [24] 1917)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXII</span>, p.&#160;330.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page388" title="388"/>Lenin, Vladimir I., “Rech’ o godovshchine revoliutsii 6 noiabre”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVII</span>, p.&#160;138.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ o professional’nykh soyuzakh, 14 marta”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIII</span>, pp.&#160;52-56.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ ob otnoshenii k vremennomu pravitel’stvu 4 (17) iiuniia [Discurso sobre la actitud hacia el gobierno provisional (4 de junio (17) 1917)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXII</span>, p.&#160;275.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ pri zakrytii s’ezda 5 aprelia, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XL</span>, p.&#160;284.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rechi na soveshchanii chlenov nemetskoi, pol’skoi, chekhoslovatskoi, vengerskoi i ital’ianskoi delegatsii <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> iiulia”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;59-60.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Revoliutsionnye dni [Días revolucionarios (1905)]”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, 5<sup>a</sup>. ed., 55 vols. con 3 índices, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel'stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1958-70, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IX</span>, p.&#160;220.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rol’ i zadachi profsoiuzov v ysloviakh novoi ekonomicheskoi politiki (Odinnadtsatyi s’ezd rkp (b), 27 marta-2 apreliia 1922)” en Institut Marksa-Engel’sa-Lenina-Stalina pri tsk kpss, <em>Kommunisticheskaia partiia Sovetskogo Soiuza v rezoliutsiiakh i resheniiakh s’ezdov, konferentsii i plenumov tsk, 1898-1953</em>, 7<sup>a</sup>. ed., Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1953, pp.&#160;603-612.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rospusk dumy i zadachi proletariata”, <em>ibid.</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, pp.&#160;316-317.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Shest’ tezizov ob ocherednykh zadachakh sovetskoi vlasti (30 de abril-3 de mayo de 1918 <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, p.&#160;279.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sotsialisticheskaia revoliutsiia i pravo natsii na samoopredelenie [La revolución socialista y el derecho de las naciones a la autodeterminación (1916)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVII</span>, p.&#160;254.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sotsializm i voina: Otnoshenie rsdrp k voine”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXV</span>, p.&#160;332.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page389" title="389"/>Lenin, Vladimir I., “Sovety postoronnego [Consejos de un observador (1917)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIV</span>, p.&#160;382-384.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Stachki metallistov v 1912 godu”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII</span>, pp.&#160;391-392.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Stachki v Rossii”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, pp.&#160;217-218.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Voina i revoliutsiia [Guerra y revolución (14 de mayo [27] 1917)]”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXII</span>, p.&#160;80.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Vserossiiskaia politicheskaia stachka”, <em>Polnoe sobranie sochinenii</em>, 5<sup>a</sup>. ed., 55 vols. con 3 índices, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel'stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1958-70, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, pp.&#160;1-4.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Vystupleniia protiv poprakov Trotskogo k resoliutsii o voine i mire 8 marta”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zakliuchitel’noe slovo 19 oktiabria”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, pp.&#160;214-220.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zakliuchitel’noe slovo po dokladu ob ocherednykh zadachakh sovetskoi vlasti”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, p.&#160;271.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zakliuchitel’noe slovo po dokladu Vserossiiskogo tsentralnogo ispolnitel’nogo komiteta i soveta narodnikh komissarov o vneshnei i vnutrennei politike 23 dekabria”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLII</span>, p.&#160;173.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zakliuchitel’noe slovo po politicheskomy otchëtu tsentral’nogo komiteta 8 marta”, <em>Polnoe Sobranie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, pp.&#160;29, 34.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Regierung und Volkswille: Eine akademische Vorlesung</em>, Georg Stilke, Berlín, 1914.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lepore, Jill, <em>The Name of War: King Philip’s War and the Origins of American Identity</em>, Alfred A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Letwin, Daniel, <em>The Challenge of Interracial Unionism: Alabama Coal Mining, 1878-1921</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Levenson-Estrada, Deborah, “The Loneliness of Working-Class Feminism: Women in the ‘Male World’ of Labour Unions, Guatemala City, 1970s”, en John D. French y Daniel James, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page390" title="390"/><em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;208-231.</p>
    <p class="frances">Levine, Donald N., “Die Selbsterhaltung der socialen Gruppe: Sociologische Studien” [1898], en <em>Gesamtausgabe</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Some Key Problems in Simmel’s Work” en Lewis A. Coser (ed.), <em>Georg Simmel</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1965, p.&#160;101.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Structure of Simmel’s Social Thought” en Kurt H. Wolff (ed.), <em>Georg Simmel, 1858-1918: A Collection of Essays, with Translations and a Bibliography</em>, Ohio State University, Columbus, 1959, p.&#160;17.</p>
    <p class="frances">Levinson, Edward, “Detroit Digs In”, <em>The Nation</em>, 16 de enero de 1937, pp.&#160;64-66.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lichtenstein, Nelson, “‘The Man in the Middle’: A Social History of Automobile Industry Foremen”, en Lichtenstein, Nelson y Stephen Meyer (eds.), <em>On the Line: Essays in the History of Auto Work</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Stephen Meyer (eds.), <em>On the Line: Essays in the History of Auto Work</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">—,“A Race Between Cynicism and Hope: Labor and Academia”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, núm.&#160;10, primavera de 2002, pp.&#160;71-79.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor’s War at Home: The <span class="versalitas">cio</span> in World War II</em>, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Most Dangerous Man in Detroit: Walter Reuther and the Fate of American Labor</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Liefmann, Robert, <em>Die Allianzen: gemeinsame monopolitische Vereinigungen der Unternehmer und Arbeiter in England</em>, Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1900.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die Unternehmerverbände (Konventionen, Kartelle): ihr Wesen und ihre Bedeutung</em>, J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Leipzig, 1897.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Kartelle und Trusts</em>, Ernst Heinrich Moritz, Stuttgart, 1905.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page391" title="391"/>Linden, Marcel van der, “Labor History”, en Smelser y Baltes (eds.), <em>International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences</em>, 26 vols., Elsevier, Ámsterdam, 2001, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, pp.&#160;8181-8185.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The End of Labour History?”, <em>International Review of Social History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, suplemento, 1993, p.&#160;1.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Working Classes, History of”, en Smelser y Baltes (eds.), <em>International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences</em>, 26 vols., Elsevier, Ámsterdam, 2001, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, pp.&#160;16579-16583.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>O futuro do trabalho: novas tecnologias e subjetividade operaria</em>, Fundacão de Amparo de Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lipietz, Alain, <em>Le capital et son espace</em>, François Maspero, París, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lipset, Seymour M., <em>Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics</em>, Doubleday, Garden City, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Martin A. Trow y James S. Coleman, <em>Union Democracy: The Internal Politics of the International Typographical Union</em>, Free Press, Glencoe, 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Torcuato di Tella, <em>Huachipato et Lota: Études sur la conscience ouvrière dans deux entreprises chiliennes</em>, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, París, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Littler, Craig R., <em>The Development of the Labour Process in Capitalist Societies: A Comparative Study of the Transformation of Work Organization in Britain, Japan, and the USA</em>, Heinemann, Londres, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Livingston, Arthur, “Editor’s Note”, <em>Mind and Society</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, p.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>.</p> 
    <p class="frances">—, “Vilfredo Pareto: A Biographical Portrait”, en <em>Saturday Review of Literature</em>, p.&#160;12.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lobato, Mirta Zaida, “Women Workers in the ‘Cathedrals of Corned Beef’: Structure and Subjectivity in the Argentine Meatpacking Industry”, en John D. French y Daniel James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;53-71.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page392" title="392"/>Lobato, Mirta Zaida <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Mujer, trabajo y ciudadanía</em>, <span class="versalitas">clacso</span>, Buenos Aires, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, (ed.), <em>Política, médicos y enfermedades: lecturas de la historia de la salud en la Argentina</em>, Editorial Biblos, Buenos Aires, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>El “taylorismo” en la gran industria exportadora argentina, 1907-1945</em>, Centro Editor de América Latina, Buenos Aires, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>La vida en las fábricas: trabajo, protesta y política en una comunidad obrera, Berisso (1904-1970)</em>, Prometeo, Buenos Aires, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lockwood, David, <em>The Blackcoated Worker: A Study in Class Consciousness</em>, Allen and Unwin, Londres, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lösch, August, <em>Die räumliche Ordnung der Wirtschaft</em> [1940], 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1944.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lovell, John, <em>Stevedores and Dockers: A Study of Trade Unionism in the Port of London, 1870-1914</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lozovski, A., “Das Aktions-Programm der Roten Gewerkschafts Internationale [1921]”, en A. Lozovski, <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, Frankfurt, Internationale Sozialistische Publikationen, 1978, pp.&#160;67-163.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <em>Rabochaia Amerika: sbornik statei</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Der grosse Stratege des Klassenkrieges [homenaje a Lenin]”, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, núm.&#160;2/3 (37/38), febrero/marzo de 1924, pp.&#160;103-112.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Amsterdam, Moskau, London</em>, Kommunistische Internationale, Hamburgo, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Aufgaben und Taktik der Roten Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale, Berlín, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der Streik in England und die Arbeiterklasse der Sowjetunion</em>, Roten Gewerkschafts-Internationale, Moscú, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der Streik: Fünf Vorträge gehalten an der Lenin-Schule zu Moskau</em>, Moscú, Roten Gewerkschafts-Internationale, 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die internationale Gewerkschaftsbewegung vor und nach dem Kriege</em>, Führer, Berlín, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die Internationale Rat der Fach—, und Industrieverbände (Mos<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page393" title="393"/>kau gegen Amsterdam)</em>, Hamburgo, Kommunistische Internationale, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lozovski, A., <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale im Angriff. Drei Reden…</em>, Moscú, Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale, 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, (ed.), <em>Handbook on the Soviet Trade Unions, for Workers’ Delegations</em>, Moscú, Foreign Workers in the U.S.S.R., 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Edinstvo mirovogo profdvizheniia: doklady i rechi na vi S’ezde profsoiuzov sssr</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Frankreich und die französiche Arbeiterbewegung in der Gegenwart: Eindrücke und Betrachtungen</em>, Roten Gewerkschafts-Internationale, Berlín, 1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>IV Sessiia Tzentral’nogo Soveta Krasnogo Internatsionala Profsoiuzov, 9-15 marta 1926 g.: ochët</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Karl Marx und die Gewerkschaften</em>, Moscú, Ausländdischer Arbeiter in der udssr, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Za edinstvo mirovogo profdvizheniia 9 avgusta 1935 g.</em>, Moscú, tskvkp (b), 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Le mouvement syndical international: avant, pendant et après la guerre</em>, Internationale Syndicale Rouge, París, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Lenin and the Trade Union Movement</em>, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Lenin, The Great Strategist of the Class War</em>, traducción al inglés de Alexander Bittelman, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Mirovoe nastuplenie kapitala</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Mirovoe profdvizhenie nakanune desiatoi godovshchiny Oktiabria</em>, Gosizdat, Moscú, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Na frantsuzskom s’ezde: rech’ na s’ezde Unitarnoi Konfederatsii Truda vo Frantsii 29-go avgusta 1925 g.</em>, Profintern, Moscú, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Organizatsionnye voprosy s prilozheniem ustava Profinterna</em>, Moscú, Krasnyi internatsional profsoiuzov, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Parizh, Breslavl’, Skarboro</em>, Pronfitern, Moscú, 1925.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Polozhenie rabochego klassa kapitalisticheskikh stran i bor’ba za edinstvo profdvizheniia</em>, Moscú, Profizdat, 1938.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page394" title="394"/>Lozovski, A., <em>Professional’nye soiuzy v sovetskoi Rossii</em>, Moscú, Vserossiskii tsentral’nyi sovet professional’nykh soiuzov, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Rabochii kontrol’: s prilozheniem instruktsii po rabochemu kontroliu Vserossiiskago Soveta rabochago kontrolia, professional’nykh soiuzov, fabrichno-zavodskikh komitetov i rezoliutsii rabochikh, tekhnicheskikh i predprinimatel’skikh organizatsii</em>, San Petersburgo, Sotsialist, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The World Economic Crisis: Strike Struggles and the Tasks of the Revolutionary Trade Union Movement</em>, Moscú, State Publishers, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The World’s Trade Union Movement</em>, traducción al inglés de M. A. Skromny, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Tred’iunionizm i neitralizm (Tipy rabochego dvizheniia Anglii i Germanii)</em>, Tver, Tversoi Gubernskii Sovet Profsoiuzov, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Ugol’ i zhelezo: k bor’be za El’zas-Lotaringiiu: ekonomischeskii etiud</em>, San Petersburgo, Kniga, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—,<em>Wie kann die Einheit der Gewekschaftsbewegung hergestellt werden?</em>, Roten Gewerkschafts-Internationale, Moscú, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">Luebke, Sam y Jennifer Luff, “Organizing: A Secret History”, <em>Labor History</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>, núm.&#160;4, otoño de 2003.</p>
    <p class="frances">Luhmann, Niklas, <em>Funktionen und Folgen formaler Organisation</em>, Duncker &amp; Humblot, Berlín, 1962.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lupton, Tom, <em>On the Shop Floor: Two Studies of Workshop Organization and Output</em>, Pergamon, Oxford, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Lusnia, Michael, “Unbewaffnete Revolution?”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/I</span>, núm.&#160;18, s. f. ¿27 de enero?, 1904, pp.&#160;559-567.</p>
    <p class="frances">Luxemburg, Rosa, “Die ‘wirtschafl iche Macht [1899]’”, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I/I</span>, pp.&#160;493-496.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Die englische Brille [1899]”, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I/I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Die industrielle Entwicklung Polens [Leipzig, Duncker &amp; Humlot, 1898]”, en Rosa Luxemburg, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, 5 vols. en 6, Dietz, Berlín, 1972-75, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I/I</span>, pp.&#160;113-216.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Die Theorie und die Praxis”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;43, 22 de julio de 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page395" title="395"/>Luxemburg, Rosa, “Eine Probe aufs Exempel [1905]”, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I/2</span>, p.&#160;532.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eine taktische Frage [1899]”, <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I/I</span>, pp.&#160;483-486.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Ermattung oder Kampf?”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;35, 27 de mayo de 1910, pp.&#160;257-266.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “In revolutionärer Stunde: Was weiter? [1906]”, en <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, p.&#160;28.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Und zum dritten Male das belgische Experiment”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XX/2</span>, núm.&#160;7, 14 de mayo de 1902, pp.&#160;203-210.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Was weiter? [1910]”, en <em>Gesammelte Werke</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, p.&#160;292.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zur Richtigstellung”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;47, 19 de agosto de 1910, pp.&#160;756-760.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Gesammelte Briefe</em>, 6 vols., Dietz, Berlín, 1982-93, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Massenstreik, Partei und Gewerkschaften</em>, Erdmann Dubber, Hamburgo, 1906.</p>
    <p class="frances">MacGregor, David H., <em>Industrial Combinations</em>, George Bell &amp; Sons, Londres, 1906.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mach, Ernst, <em>Die Geschichte und die Wurzel des Satzes von der Erhaltung der Arbeit</em>, J. G. Calve, Praga, 1872.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mackenzie King, W. L., <em>Industry and Humanity: A Study in the Principles Underlying Industrial Reconstruction</em>, Houghton Miffl in, Boston, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">Macrosty, Henry W., “The Recent History of the Living Wage Movement”, <em>Political Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, 3, septiembre de 1898.</p>
    <p class="frances">MacShane, Denis, <em>International Labour and the Origins of the Cold War</em>, Clarendon, Oxford, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mallet, Serge, <em>La nouvelle classe ouvrière</em>, Seuil, París, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mallon, “Refl ections on the Ruins: Everyday Forms of State Formation in Nineteenth-Century Mexico”, en Gilbert M. Joseph y Daniel Nugent (eds.), <em>Everyday Forms of State Formation: Revolution and the Negotiation of Rule in Modern Mexico</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1994, pp.&#160;69-106.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mallon, Florencia E., “The Promise and Dilemma of Subaltern <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page396" title="396"/>Studies: Perspectives from Latin American History”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XCIX</span>, 5, diciembre de 1994, pp.&#160;1491-1515.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mallon, Florencia E., “Time on the Wheel: Cycles of Revisionism and the ‘New Cultural History’”, <em>Hispanic American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 2, mayo de 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Peasant and Nation: The Making of Postcolonial Mexico and Peru</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mandel, David, “Why is There no Revolt?’ The Russian Working Class and Labour Movement”, <em>Socialist Register 2001</em>, pp.&#160;187-192.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mandel, Ernest, ed., <em>Contrôle ouvrier, conseils ouvriers, autogestion: Anthologie</em>, Maspéro, París, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Traité d’economie marxiste</em>, 2 vols., René Julliard, París, 1962, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mangum, Garth L., <em>The Operating Engineers: The Economic History of a Trade Union</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1964.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mann, Floyd C. y L. Richard Hoffman, <em>Automation and the Worker: A Study of Social Change in Power Plants</em>, Henry Holt, Nueva York, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mann, Michael, <em>The Sources of Social Power</em>, 2 vols., Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1986-93.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mao Tse-Tung, “On Practice [1937]”, y “On Contradiction [1937]”, <em>Selected Works</em>, 4 vols., Foreign Languages Press, Pekín, 1967-69, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marcus, Lynn, “Automation: The New Industrial Revolution”, <em>Fourth International</em>, primavera de 1954, pp.&#160;53-58.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marglin, Stephen A., “What Do Bosses Do? The Origins and Functions of Hierarchy in Capitalist Production [1971]”, <em>Review of Radical Political Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;2, verano de 1974, pp.&#160;33-60.</p>
    <p class="frances">Margolis, Julius, “Sequential Decision Making in the Firm”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">L</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1960, pp.&#160;527-530.</p>
    <p class="frances">Markham, C. H., “The Development, Strategy and Traffic of the Illinois Central System”, <em>Economic Geography</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page397" title="397"/>Marquet, Yves, “La place du travail dans la hiérarchie isma’ilienne d’après <em>L’Encyclopédie des Frères de la Pureté”, Arabica</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, 3, septiembre de 1961, pp.&#160;225-237.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marschak, J., “Newman’s and Morgenstern’s New Approach to Statistic Economics”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LIV</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1946, pp.&#160;97-115.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marshall, Alfred, <em>Elements of Economics of Industry</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1892.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Mary p.&#160;Marshall, <em>The Economics of Industry</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1879.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Principles of Economics</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Macmillan, Londres, 1891.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Principles of Economics</em>, 9<sup>a</sup>. ed., con notas de C. W. Guillebaud, 2 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1961, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marshall, F. Ray, <em>Labor in the South</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Martov, L., “Die preussische Diskussion und die russische Erfahrung”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span>, núm.&#160;51, 16 de septiembre de 1910, p.&#160;913.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sotsialdemokratiia, 1905-1907”, en L. Martov <em>et al</em>., <em>Obshchestvennoe dvizhenie v Rossii v nachalie  XX -go vieka</em>, 5 vols. (4 publicados, en 6), Obshchestvennaia pol’za, San Petersburgo, 1909-1914, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marwell, Gerald y Pamela Oliver, <em>The Critical Mass in Collective Action: A Micro-Social Theory</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marx, Carlos, <em>Das Kapital: Kritik der politischen Oekonomie</em> [1867, cuarta edición, 1890], en Karl Marx y Friedrich Engels, Werke, 43 vols., Dietz, Berlín, 1957-1990, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Frederick Engels, <em>Selected Works</em>, 2 vols., Foreign Languages Publishing, Moscú, 1958, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Friedrich Engels, “Die deutsche Ideologie, <em>Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, pp.&#160;109-127.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Friedrich Engels, “Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei” [1848], en <em>Werke</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional Gener<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page398" title="398"/>al Council: The Different Questions”, agosto de 1866, <em>Selected Works</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, p.&#160;348.</p>
    <p class="frances">Marx, Carlos, “The Fourth Annual Report of the General Council of the International Working Men’s Association”, 1° de septiembre de 1868, en <em>The General Council of the First International, 1864-1872: Minutes</em>, 5 vols., Editorial Progreso, Moscú, 1962-1968, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, p.&#160;329.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Wages, Price, and Profit”, 20 y 27 de junio de 1865, en Carlos Marx y Friedrich Engels, <em>Selected Works</em>, 2 vols., Foreign Language Publishing House, Moscú, 1958, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;446-447.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mason, Timothy W., <em>Sozialpolitik im Dritten Reich: Arbeiterklasse und Volksgemeinschaft</em>, Westdeutscher Verlag, Opladen, 1977</p>
    <p class="frances">Masud, M. y R. Kahn, “Introduction”, en D. W. Winnicott, <em>Holding and Interpretation: Fragment of an Analysis</em>, Grove Press, Nueva York, 1987, pp.&#160;1-18.</p>
    <p class="frances">Massey, Doreen, <em>Spatial Divisions of Labour: Social Structures and the Geography of Production</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mathewson, Stanley B., <em>Restriction of Output among Unorganized Workers</em>, Viking, Nueva York, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mattick, Paul, <em>Anti-Bolshevik Communism</em>, Merlin, Londres, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mayo, Elton, <em>The Human Problems of an Industrial Civilization</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em><em>et al</em>., Teamwork and Labor Turnover in the Aircraft Industry of Southern California</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">McAdam, Doug, <em>Freedom Summer</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">McCallum, D. C., <em>United States Military Railroads of Bvt. Brig. Gen. D. C. McCallum</em>, Government Printing Office, Washington, 1866.</p>
    <p class="frances">McCartin, Joseph A., <em>Labor’s Great War: The Struggle for Industrial Democracy and the Origins of Modern Labor Relations, 1912-1921</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">McCormack, A. Ross, <em>Reformers, Rebels, and Revolutionaries:The <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page399" title="399"/>Western Canadian Radical Movement, 1899-1919</em>, University of Toronto, Toronto, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">McDowell, Eileen, Jean Quataert y Robert Wheeler, (eds.), <em>European Labor and Working Class History Newsletter</em>, 1971-1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">McIvor, Arthur J., <em>A History of Work in Britain</em>, 1880-1950, Palgrave, Basingstoke, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Arthur J. y Ronald Johnston, <em>Lethal Work: A History of the Asbestos Tragedy in Scotland</em>, Tuckwell, East Linton, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">McKibbin, Ross, <em>The Ideologies of Class: Social Relations in Britain, 1880-1950</em>, Oxford University, Oxford, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">McNeill, George E., Jacob G. Schonfarber y Samuel Gompers en U. S. Industrial Commission, <em>Report of the Industrial Commission</em>, 19 vols., gpo, Washington, 1900-1902.</p>
    <p class="frances">McPherson, W. H., “Automobiles”, en <em>How Collective Bargaining Works</em>, Twentieth Century Fund, Nueva York, 1942, pp.&#160;591-594, 602</p>
    <p class="frances">Mechanic, David, “Sources of Power of Lower Participants in Complex Organizations”, <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núm.&#160;3, diciembre de 1962, pp.&#160;349-364.</p>
    <p class="frances">Medvedev, Roy, <em>Let History Judge: The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism</em>, revisada y aumentada, Columbia University, Nueva York, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mehring, Franz, “Eine Geschichte der Kriegskunst”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, 16 de octubre de 1908, en <em>Gesammelte Schriften</em>, 15 vols., Dietz Verlag, Berlín, 1960-1966, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span> viii, pp.&#160;134-140.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Was nun?”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI/I</span>, núm.&#160;15, 7 de enero de 1903, pp.&#160;449-453.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zur Kriegsgeschichte und Militarfrage”, en <em>Gesammelte Schriften</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mencherini, Robert, <em>Guerre froide, grèves rouges: Parti communiste, stalinisme et luttes sociales en France: Les grèves “insurrectionnelles” de 1947-1948</em>, Syllepse, París, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Menger, Carl, <em>Grundsätze der Volkswirtschaftslehre</em>, Wilhelm Braumüller, Viena, 1871.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Untersuchungen über die Methode der Socialwissenschaften, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page400" title="400"/>und der politischen Ökonomie insbesondere</em>, Duncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig, 1883.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mercier, Laurie, <em>Anaconda: Labor, Community, and Culture in Montana’s Smelter City</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 2001.</p>
    <p class="frances">Merz, John T., <em>A History of European Thought in the Nineteenth Century</em>, 4 vols., Dover, Nueva York, 1965 [1904-1912].</p>
    <p class="frances">Metelkov, Petr F., <em>Zheleznodorozhniki v revoliutsii: fevral 1917 iiun 1918</em>, Lenizdat, Leningrado, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">Metzgar, Jack, <em>Striking Steel: Solidarity Remembered</em>, Temple University, Filadelfia, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Meyer, Stephen, “Technology and the Workplace: Skilled and Production Workers at Allis-Chalmers, 1900-1941”, <em>Technology and Culture</em>, pp.&#160;839-864.</p>
    <p class="frances">Meyerowitz, Ruth, “Organizing the United Automobile Workers: Women Workers at the Ternstedt General Motors Parts Plant”, en Ruth Milkman (ed.), <em>Women, Work, and Protest: A Century of US Women’s Labor History</em>, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, Boston, 1985, pp.&#160;235-258.</p>
    <p class="frances">Michael Faraday, “The Conservation of Force” [1857] en Edward L. Youmans, ed., <em>The Correlation and Conservation of Forces: A Series of Expositions</em>, Nueva York, D. Appleton and Co., 1865, pp.&#160;359-383.</p>
    <p class="frances">Middlebrook, Kevin J., <em>The Paradox of Revolution: Labor, the State and Authoritarianism in Mexico</em>, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, 1995, pp.&#160;135-147.</p>
    <p class="frances">Milkman, Ruth, <em>Gender at Work: The Dynamics of Job Segregation by Sex during World War Two</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mill, John Stuart, <em>Principles of Political Economy, with Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy</em>, 2 vols., Charles C. Little &amp; James Brown, Boston.</p>
    <p class="frances">Miller, Delbert C., <em>Industrial Sociology: Work in Organizational Life</em>, Harper &amp; Row, Nueva York, 1980, 3<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y William H. Form, <em>Industrial Sociology: An Introduction to the Sociology of Work Relations</em>, Harper &amp; Brothers, Nueva York, 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page401" title="401"/>Miller, Delbert C., y William H. Form, <em>Industrial Sociology: The Sociology of Work Organizations</em>, Harper &amp; Row, Nueva York, 1964, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">Miller, Jim, <em>“Democracy is in the Streets”: From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago</em>, Simon and Schuster, Nueva York, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Miller, Joanne, “Jobs and Work”, en Neil J. Smelser (ed.), <em>The Handbook of Sociology</em>, Sage, Newbury Park, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mills, John <em><em>et al</em>., Strategy and Performance: Competing through Competences</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 2002.</p>
    <p class="frances">Minchin, Timothy J., <em>What Do We Need a Union For? The  <span class="versalitas bajas">TWUA</span> in the South, 1945-1955</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mintzberg, Henry, “Managerial Work: Analysis from Observation”, <em>Management Science</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, núm.&#160;1, octubre de 1971, pp.&#160;101-109.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., “The Structure of ‘Unstructured’ Decision Processes”, <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, núm.&#160;1, junio de 1976, pp.&#160;246-275.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., <em>Strategy Safari: A Guided Tour Through the Wilds of Strategic Management</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Patterns in Strategy Formation”, <em>Management Science</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;9, mayo de 1978, pp.&#160;934-948.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Policy as a Field of Management Theory”, <em>Academy of Management Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1977, pp.&#160;89-103.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Nature of Managerial Work</em>, Harper &amp; Row, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Rise and Fall of Strategic Planning</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mlynár, Zdenek, <em>Krisen und Krisenbewältigung im Sowjetblock</em>, traducción de Jiri Starek, Bund, Colonia, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Nightfrost in Prague: The End of Humane Socialism</em>, traducción al inglés de Paul Wilson, Nueva York, Karz, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Praga, questione aperta: il ‘68 cecoslovacco fra giudizio storico e prospettive future</em>, De Donato, Bari, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page402" title="402"/>Mommsen, Hans y Manfred Grieger, <em>Das Volkswagenwerk und seine Arbeiter im Dritten Reich</em>, econ, Düsseldorf, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mommsen, Wolfgang J., <em>Max Weber und die deutsche Politik, 1890-1920</em>, J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], Tubinga, 1959.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Montgomery, David, <em>Workers’ Control in America: Studies in the History of Work, Technology, and Labor Struggles</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1979</p>
    <p class="frances">Moody, J. Carroll y Alice Kessler-Harris (eds.), <em>Perspectives on American Labor History: The Problems of Synthesis</em>, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Moore, Karl y David Lewis, <em>Birth of the Multinational: 2000 Years of Ancient Business History from Ashur to Augustus</em>, Copenhagen Business School, Copenhague, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Moore, Wilbert E., <em>Industrial Relations and the Social Order</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Industrialization and Labor: Social Aspects of Economic Development</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1951.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Impact of Industry</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">More, Charles, <em>Skill and the English Working Class, 1870-1914</em>, Croom Helm, Londres, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Morgenstern, Oskar, “Oligopoly, Monopolistic Competition, and the Theory of Games”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">Morris, James O., <em>Conflict within the  <span class="versalitas bajas">AFL</span>: A Study of Craft versus Industrial Unionism, 1901-1938</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Morse, David A., <em>Origin and Evolution of the I.L.O. and Its Role in the World Community</em>, Cornell University, Ithaca, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mortimer, Wyndham, <em>Organize! My Life as a Union Man</em>, Beacon, Boston, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Moss, Bernard H., <em>The Origins of the French Labor Movement, 1830-1914: The Socialism of Skilled Workers</em>, Univesity of California, Berkeley, 1976</p>
    <p class="frances">Moutet, Aimée, <em>Les logiques de l’entreprise: La rationalisation dans <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page403" title="403"/>l’industrie française de l’entre-deux-guerres</em>, L’École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales, París, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Mstislavskii, S. D., <em>Five Days Which Transformed Russia</em>, traducido por Elizabeth K. Zelensky, Hutchinson, Londres, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Die Besetzung des Ruhrgebiets und die Arbeiterstrategie”, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, núm.&#160;2 (25), febrero de 1923, pp.&#160;134-142.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Stukoff: Strategie und Taktik des Klassenkampfes”, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, núm.&#160;9 (32), septiembre de 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">Muller, Jerry Z., <em>The Other God That Failed: Hans Freyer and the Deradicalization of German Conservatism</em>, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Munson, Fred C., <em>Labor Relations in the Lithographic Industry</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Myers, Charles S., <em>Mind and Work: The Psychological Factors in Industry and Commerce</em>, University of London, Londres, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">Myers, Robert J. y Joseph W. Boch, “Men’s Clothing”, <em>How Collective Bargaining Works</em>, Twentieth Century Fund, Nueva York, 1942, p.&#160;395</p>
    <p class="frances">Nairn, Tom, “The Nature of the Labour Party, Part <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>”, <em>Arguments Within English Marxism</em>, núm.&#160;27, septiembre-octubre de 1964, pp.&#160;39-43.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nash, Gary B. <em><em>et al</em>., History on Trial: Culture Wars and the Teaching of the Past</em>, Knopf, Nueva York, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nash, John, “Two-Person Cooperative Games”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1953.</p>
    <p class="frances">Naville, Pierre, “L’avenir des élites et la réforme de l’enseignement”, en Charles Bettelheim <em><em>et al</em>., La crise francaise: Essais et documents</em>, París, Pavois, 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., <em>L’automation et le travail humain: Rapport d’enquête</em> (France, 1957-1959), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, París, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Pierre Rolle, “L’évolution technique et ses incidences sur la vie sociale”, en Friedmann y Naville, <em>Traité de sociologie du travail</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;364-370.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page404" title="404"/>Naville, Pierre, “Le progrès technique, l’évolution du travail et l’organisation de l’entreprise”, <em>Traité de sociologie du travail</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;371-386.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Travail et guerre”, <em>Traité de sociologie du travail</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;305-327.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Le nouveau Leviathan: De l’alienation à la jouissance: La genèse de la sociologie du travail chez Marx et Engels</em>, Marcel Rivière et Cie., París, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Théorie de l’orientation professionelle</em>, Gallimard, París, 1945.</p>
    <p class="frances">Negri, Antonio, “Partito operario contro il lavoro”, en Sergio Bologna <em><em>et al</em>., Crisi e organizzazione operaria</em>, Feltrinelli, Milán, 1974, pp.&#160;99-193.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>La fabbrica della strategia: 33 lezioni su Lenin</em>, La Monzese, Milán, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Neisser, H., “Oligopoly as a Non-Zero-Sum Game”, <em>Review of Economic Studies</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXV</span>, núm.&#160;1, octubre de 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nelson, Daniel, <em>American Rubber Workers and Organized Labor, 1900-1941</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nelson, Richard R. y Sidney G. Winter, <em>An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Neumann, John Von y Oskar Morgenstern, <em>Theory of Games and Economic Behavior</em>, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1944.</p>
    <p class="frances">Neumann, Sigmund y Mark von Hagen, “Engels and Marx on Revolution, War, and the Army in Society”, en Peter Paret (ed.), <em>Makers of Modern Strategy, from Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1986, pp.&#160;262-280.</p>
    <p class="frances">Neusner, Jacob, “Work in Formative Judaism”, en Jacob Neusner <em><em>et al</em>.</em> (eds.), <em>The Encyclopedia of Judaism</em>, 3 vols., Continuum, Nueva York, 1999, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, pp.&#160;1502-1516.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nichols, Theo y Peter Armstrong, <em>Workers Divided</em>, Fontana, Londres, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Noble, David F., <em>Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial Automation</em>, A. A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page405" title="405"/>Noiriel, Gérard, <em>Longwy: Immigrés et prolétaires, 1880-1980</em>, Presses Universitaires, París, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Noon, Mike y Paul Blyton, <em>The Realities of Work</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Norrell, Robert J., “After Thirty Years of ‘New’ Labour History, There is Still no Socialism in Reagan Country”, <em>The Historical Journal</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIII</span>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, marzo de 1990, pp.&#160;227-238.</p>
    <p class="frances">North, Douglas C., “Location Theory and Regional Economic Growth”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, junio de 1953, pp.&#160;250, n.&#160;37.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nyden, Paul J., “Rank-and-File Organizations in the United Mine Workers of America”, <em>The Insurgent Sociologist</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;2 y 3, otoño de 1978, pp.&#160;25-39.</p>
    <p class="frances">Nyden, Philip, “Rank-and-File Organizations and the United Steelworkers of America”, The Insurgent Sociologist, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;2 y 3, otoño de 1978, pp.&#160;15-24.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Steelworkers Rank-and-File: The Political Economy of a Union Reform Movement</em>, Praeger, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">O’Donnell, Terence, “Pitfalls Along the Path of Public History”, <em>The Public Historian</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, invierno de 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">O’Sullivan, Mary, “Corporate Control”, en Malcolm Warner (ed.), <em>International Encyclopedia of Business and Management</em>, 8 vols., 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Thomson Learning, Londres, 2002, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;1068-1094;</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Innovative Enterprise and Corporate Governance”, <em>Cambridge Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Contests for Corporate Control: Corporate Governance and Economic Performance in the United States and Germany</em>, Nueva York, Oxford, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Oberschall, Anthony, <em>Social Conflict and Social Movements</em>, Prentice—, Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Offe, Claus <em><em>et al</em>., Disorganized Capitalism: Contemporary Transformations of Work and Politics</em> [1973-1984], trad. de Karen Grislis <em><em>et al</em>.</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">MIT</span>, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page406" title="406"/>Offe, Claus, y Helmut Wiesenthal, “Two Logics of Collective Action”, en Maurice Zeitlin (ed.), <em>Political Power and Social Theory</em>, 1980, pp.&#160;67-115.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ohlin, Bertil, <em>Interregional and International Trade</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ohmae, Kenichi, <em>The Mind of the Strategist: The Art of Japanese Business</em> [<em>Kigyo Sanbo</em>, “el estratega corporativo” o, más literalmente, “el estado mayor general (<em>general staff</em>) de la compañía”, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Olberg, Oda, “Der italienische Generalstreik”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII/I</span>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, 28 de septiembre, 1904, pp.&#160;18-24.</p>
    <p class="frances">Olson, Mancur, <em>The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">Onselen, Charles Van, <em>Chibaro: African Mine Labour in Southern Rhodesia, 1900-1933</em>, Pluto Press, Londres, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Oppenheimer, Franz, “Käufer und Verkäufer: Ein Beitrag zur wirtschaftlichen Kollectivpsychologie”, <em>Jahrbuch für Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im Deutschen Reich</em>, nueva serie, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;4, 1900, p.&#160;145.</p>
    <p class="frances">Palander, Tord, <em>Beiträge zur Standortstheorie</em>, Almqvist &amp; Wiksell, Uppsala, 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Palloix, Christian, <em>L’économie mondiale capitaliste et les firmes multinationales</em>, 2 vols., François Maspero, París, 1975, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Procès de production et crise du capitalism</em>, François Maspero, Grenoble, 1977.</p>
    <p class="frances">Palmer, Bryan D., <em>A Culture in Conflict: Skilled Workers and Industrial Capitalism in Hamilton, Ontario, 1860-1914</em>, McGill-Queen’s University, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Palyi, Melchior, “Bank Portfolios and the Control of the Capital Market”, <em>Journal of Business of the University of Chicago</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1938, p.&#160;91.</p>
    <p class="frances">Panitch, Leo, “Globalisation and the State”, en <em>The Socialist Register 1992: The New World Order</em> y Miliband (eds.), <em>The Socialist Register 1994: Between Globalism and Nationalism</em>, Merlin, Londres, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page407" title="407"/>Panitch, Leo, y Ralph Miliband, “The New World Order and the Socialist Agenda”, en Panitch, Leo y Ralph Miliband (eds.), <em>The Socialist Register 1992: The New World Order</em>, Merlin, Londres, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Reflections on Strategy for Labour”, en Panitch, Leo <em>et al </em>(eds.), The <em>Socialist Register 2001: Working Classes, Global Realities</em>, Merlin, Londres, 2001, pp.&#160;367-392.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pantaleoni, Maffeo, “An Attempt to Analyse the Concepts of ‘Strong and Weak’ in Their Economic Connection”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;30, junio de 1898, pp.&#160;183-205.</p>
    <p class="frances">Panzieri, Raniero, “Apunti per un esame della situazione del movimiento operario [1957]”, Gaetano Arfé (ed.), <em>Mondo Operario</em>, 1956-1965, 2 vols., Luciano Landi, Florencia, 1966-67, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;746-748.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Lucio Libertini, “Sette tesi sulla questione del controllo operario [1958]”, <em>Mondo Operario</em>, vol&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;&#160;835-838. </p>
    <p class="frances">Panzieri, Raniero y Lucio Libertini, “Un dibattito sul ‘l’Unità’ [1958]”, <em>Mondo Operario</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;883-884.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Lotte operarie nello sviluppo capitalistico [1962]”, <em>Spontaneità e organizzazione: Gli anni dei “Quaderni rossi”</em>, pp.&#160;73-92.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Spontaneità e organizzazione [1963]”, <em>Spontaneità e organizzazione: Gli anni dei “Quaderni rossi”</em>, pp.&#160;111-115.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sull’uso capitalistico delle macchine nel neocapitalismo [1961]”, <em>Spontaneità e organizzazione: Gli anni dei “Quaderni rossi”</em>, 1959-1964, Franco Serantini, Pisa, 1994, pp.&#160;25-41.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pareto, Vilfredo, <em>Cours d’économie politique</em>, 2 vols., F. Rouge, Lausana, 1896.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Manuel d’économie politique</em>, V. Giard &amp; E. Brière, París, 1909.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Mind and Society</em>, 4 vols., editado por Arthur Livingston y traducido por Andrew Bongiorno y Arthur Livingston, con James Harvey Rogers, Harcourt, Brace and Company, Nueva York, 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Parker, Sybil p.&#160;(ed.), <em>Encyclopedia of Science and Technology</em>, 8<sup>a</sup>. ed., 20 vols., McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page408" title="408"/>Parkin, Frank, <em>Marxism and Class Theory: A Bourgeois Critique</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Parr, Joy, <em>The Gender of Breadwinners: Women, Men, and Change in Two Industrial Towns, 1880-1950</em>, University of Toronto, Toronto, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Parsons, Talcott, <em>The Structure of Social Action: A Study in Social Theory with Special Reference to a Group of Recent European Writers</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Introduction: On Certain Sociological Elements in Professor Taussig’s Thought”, <em>Explorations in Economics: Notes and Essays Contributed in Honor of F. W. Taussig</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1936.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Some Reflections on ‘The Nature and Significance of Economics’”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLVIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, mayo de 1934, pp.&#160;525-534.</p>
    <p class="frances">Parvus, “Staatsstreich und politischer Massenstreik”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der Klassenkampf des Proletariats </em> [1908-1910], Vorwärts, Berlín, 1911.</p>
    <p class="frances">Patinkin, Don, “Involuntary Unemployment and the Keynesian Supply Function”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LIX</span>, septiembre de 1949.</p>
    <p class="frances">Patton, Harald S., “The Market Infl uence of the Canadian Wheat Pool”, <em>Journal of the American Statistical Association</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, marzo de 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Peck, Sidney M., “Fifty Years after ‘A Theory of the Labor Movement’: Class Conflict in the United States”, <em>The Insurgent Sociologist</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;2 y 3, otoño de 1978, pp.&#160;10-13.</p>
    <p class="frances">Peck, Sidney M., <em>The Rank-and-File Leader</em>, College and University Press, New Haven, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Peet, Richard, “Outline for a Second-Year Course on the Socioeconomic Geography of American Poverty”, <em>Antipode</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;2, diciembre de 1970, pp.&#160;1-34.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pen, Jan, <em>The Wage Rate under Collective Bargaining</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1959.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page409" title="409"/>Pencavel, John (el mejor después de Dunlop sobre el tema), <em>Labor Markets under Tade Unionism: Employment, Wages and Hours</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">Penn, Roger, <em>Skilled Workers in the Class Structure</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Penrose, Edith Tilton, “Profi t Sharing Between Producing Countries and Oil Companies in the Middle East”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIX</span>, junio de 1959, pp.&#160;239.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The History of the Growth of the Firm</em>, Blackwell, Oxford, 1959.</p>
    <p class="frances">Perlman, Selig, <em>Theory of the Labor Movement</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">Perrone, Luca, “Il potere vulnerante degli scioperi: una analisi sulla posizione dei confl itti nel sistema delle interdipendenze”, <em>Sociologia e Ricerca sociale</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;2-3, diciembre de 1980, pp.&#160;93-127.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Erik O. Wright, “Marxist Class Categories and Income Inequality”, <em>American Sociological Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLII</span>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, febrero de 1977, pp.&#160;32-55.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Erik O. Wright, “Classi sociali, scuola, occupazione e reddito in U.S.A.: Una analisi quantitativa sulle diseguaglianze en una società post-industriale”, <em>Quaderni di Sociologia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;1-2, enero de 1975, pp.&#160;55-91.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Innovazione informatica e ruoli manageriali nella organizzazione aziendale” en Franco Rositi (ed.), <em>Razionalità sociale e tecnologie dell’informazione: descrizione e critica dell’utopia tecnocratica</em>, 3 vols., Comunità, Milán, 1973, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Positional Power and Propensity to Strike”, Erik O. Wright (ed.), <em>Politics and Society</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, núm.&#160;2, 1983, pp.&#160;231-261.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Positional Power, Strikes and Wages”, Erik O. Wright (ed.), <em>American Sociological Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIX</span>, núm.&#160;3, junio de 1984, pp.&#160;413-421.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Potere vulnerante e propensione alla sciopero”, en Giuseppe Colasanti y Luca Perrone (eds.), <em>Scioperi e movimenti colle<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page410" title="410"/>tivi: Strikes as Collective Action, The Italian School Approach</em>, Casa del Libro, Roma, 1982, pp.&#160;177-213.</p>
    <p class="frances">Perrot, Michelle, <em>Les ouvriers en grève: France, 1871-1890</em>, 2. vols., Mouton, París, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Perrow, Charles, <em>Organizational Analysis: A Sociological View</em>, Wadsworth, Belmont, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">Perry, Stewart E., <em>San Francisco Scavengers: Dirty Work and the Pride of Ownership</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Peters, J., <em>The Communist Party: A Manual on Organization</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">SLI</span>, Workers Library, Nueva York, 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Phelps, Orme W., “Millis, Harry Alvin”, en <em>Dictionary of American Biography, Supplement Four (1946-1950)</em>, Scribner’s, Nueva York, 1974, pp.&#160;579-580.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pigou, Arthur C., “Equilibrum”, 1908, pp.&#160;205-213.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Monopoly and Consumers’ Surplus”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>, núm.&#160;55, septiembre de 1904, pp.&#160;388-394.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Economics of Welfare</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. edición, Macmillan, Londres, 1920</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Wealth and Welfare</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1912.</p>
    <p class="frances">Piore, Michael J. y Charles F. Sabel, <em>The Second Industrial Divide</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pisarenko, E. E., “Strumilin, Stanislav Gustavovich” en A.M. Prokhorov (ed.), <em>The Great Soviet Encyclopedia</em>, 31 vols., Macmillan, Nueva York, 1973-83, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, p.&#160;606.</p>
    <p class="frances">Piven, Frances Fox y Richard Cloward, “New Strategies: Disrupting Cyberspace: A New Frontier for Labor Activism”, <em>New Labor Forum</em>, núm.&#160;8, primavera de 2001, pp.&#160;91-94.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pizzorno, Alessandro (ed.), <em>Lotte operaie e sindacato in Italia, 1968-1972</em>, 6 vols., Mulino, Bolonia, 1974-1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Plaut, W. Gunther, ed., <em>The Torah: A Modern Commentary</em>, Union of American Hebrew Congregations, Nueva York, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Plejánov, Georgii V., “Pis’ma o taktiki i bestaktnosti [1906]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Anarkhizm i sotsializm [1894]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page411" title="411"/>Plejánov, Georgii V., “Avgust Bebel’ [1910]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, pp.&#160;122.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Dve linii revoliutsii”, <em>Prizyv</em>, 17 de octubre de 1915, p.&#160;4.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eshche o nashem polozhenie [1905]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, p.&#160;13.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eshche raz o printsipakh i taktike russkikh sotsialistov [1890]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, pp.&#160;117-119.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Eshche raz sotsializm i politicheskaia bor’ba [1900?]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Interv’iu s sotrudnikom gazety ‘lug’ [1913]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, pp.&#160;555-556.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “K voprosu o zakhvate vlasti [1905]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Komediia oshibok [1910]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Nashe polozheneie [1905]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, p.&#160;355.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O taktike voobshche, o taktike nikolaevskogo generala Reada v chastnosti i o taktike B. Krichevskogo v osobennosti [1901]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, p.&#160;126.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O vyborakh v Dumu [1906]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;55, 56.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Opportiunizm, raskol ili bor’ba za vliianie v partii? [1909]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Otkrytoe pis’mo k soznatel’nym rabochim [1906]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;331-332.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Pis’ma k soznatel’nym rabochim [1914]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, p.&#160;537.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Pis’ma o taktike [1906]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Poslednee plenarnoe sobranie nashego Tsentral’nogo Komiteta [1910]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sila i nacilie (k voprosu o revoliutsionnoi taktike) [1895]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page412" title="412"/>Plejánov, Georgii V., “Sovremennye zadachi russkikh rabochikh (pis’mo k peterburgskim rabochim kruzhkam [1885]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, Izdanie Biblioteki Nauchnogo Sotsializma, Ginebra, 1905.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Vroz’itti, vmeste bit’ [1905]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Vsem sestram po ser’gam [1911]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zametki publitsista: novye pis’ma o taktike i bestaktnosti [1907]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 26 vols. (24 publicados), vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Development of the Monist View of History</em> [1894], Foreign Languages Publishing, Moscú, 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">Podvoiskii, Nikolai I., <em>God 1917</em> [1918-1933], Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Poole, Michael, <em>Industrial Relations: Origins and Patterns of National Diversity</em>, Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, Londres, 1986</p>
    <p class="frances">Popitz, Heinrich <em>et al., Technik und Industriearbeit: Soziologische Untersuchungen in der Hüttenindustrie</em>, J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], Tubinga, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Porter, Michael E., “Strategy and the Internet”, en <em>Harvard Business Review on Advances in Strategy</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 2002, pp.&#160;1-50.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Per-formance</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and Competitors</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Competitive Advantage of Nations</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Potier, Jean-Pierre Potier, “L’Assemblée Constituante et la question de la liberté du travail: un texte méconnu, la loi Le Chapelier”, en Jean-Michel Servet (ed.), <em>Idées économiques sous la Révolution (1789-1794)</em>, Presses Universitaires de Lyon, Lyon, 1989, pp.&#160;235-254</p>
    <p class="frances">Poulantzas, Nicos, <em>Les classes sociales dans le capitalisme  aujourd’hui</em>, Seuil, París, 1974, p.&#160;350.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page413" title="413"/>Price, Richard, “Rethinking Labour History: The Importance of Work”, en James E. Cronin y Jonathan Schneer, <em>Social Conflict and the Political Order in Modern Britain</em>, Croom Helm, Londres, 1982, pp.&#160;179-214.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Labour Process and Labour History”, <em>Social History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;1, enero de 1983, pp.&#160;57-73.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Masters, Unions and Men: Work Control in Building and the Rise of Labour, 1830-1914</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Pries, Ludger <em>et al.</em>, <em>Entwicklungspfade von Industriearbeit: Chancen und Risisken betrieblicher Produktionsmodernisierung</em>, Westdeutscher Verlag, Opladen, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances"><em>Problems of Strike Strategy: Decisions of the International Conference on Strike Strategy Held in Strassburg, Germany, January, 1929,</em> Workers Library, Nueva York, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Profintern (Internacional Sindical Roja), <em>L’activité de l’I.S.R.: Rapport pour le  III ème congrès</em>, La Cootypographie, París, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Prott, Jürgen, <em>Industriearbeit bei betrieblichen Umstrukturierungen: Soziales Konzequenzen, Interessenvertretung und Bewusstseinsstrukturen</em>, Bund-Verlag, Cologne, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Przeworski, Adam, <em>Capitalism and Social Democracy</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rad, Gerhard von, <em>Genesis: A Commentary</em>, edición revisada, Westminster, Filadelfia, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page414" title="414"/>Radek, Karl, “O taktike” en Bela Kun (ed.), <em>Kommunisticheskii Internatsional v dokumentakh: resheniia, tezisy i vozzvaniia kongressov Komiterna i plenumov  IKKI , 1919-1932</em>, 2 vols., Partiinoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1933, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;180-201.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der Weg der Kommunistischen Internationale (Referat über die Taktik der Kommunistischen Internationale</em>, Kommunistischen Internationale, Berlín, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die Entickwicklung der Weltrevolution und die Taktik der Kommunistischen Parteien im Kämpfe um die Diktatur des Proletariats</em>, Westeuropäische Secretariat des Kommunistischen Internationale, Berlín, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">Radek, Karl, <em>Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Wissenschaft zur Tat</em>, Promachos, Berna, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Programm des sozialistischen Wirtschaftsaufbaues</em>, A. Seehof &amp; Co., Leipzig, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Proletarische Diktatur und Terrorismus</em>, Kommunistische Internationale, Berlín, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Zur Taktik des Kommunismus: Ein Schreiben an den Oktober-Parteitag der</em> K. P. D., K. P. D. [Spartakusbund], Berlín, 1919, p.&#160;5.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rankin, Tom, <em>New Forms of Work Organization: The Challenge for North American Unions</em>, University of Toronto, Toronto, 1990.</p>
    <p class="frances">Raptis, Michel, “Le dossier de l’autogestion en Algérie”, <em>Autogestion: Études, débats, documents</em>, núm.&#160;3, septiembre de 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rautenstrauch, Walter, “Machine Elements”, en Lionel S. Marks (ed.), <em>Mechanical Engineers’ Handbook</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1916, pp.&#160;734-748.</p>
    <p class="frances">Reder, Melvin W., “Job Scarcity and the Nature of Union Power”, <em>Industrial and Labor Relations Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, abril de 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Reed, Michael I., <em>Redirections in Organizational Analysis</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Reid, Donald, <em>The Miners of Decazeville: A Genealogy of Deindustrialization</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Repossi, L., “Fabrik und Gewerkschaft (Ein Beitrag zur Streikstrategie)”, <em>Die Rote Gewerkschafts-Internationale</em>, núm.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span> (36), enero de 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ricci, Umberto, <em>Dal protezionismo al sindicalismo</em>, Giuzeppe Laterza &amp; Figli, Bari, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rice, Arthur K., <em>Productivity and Social Organization: The Ahmedabad Experiment: Technical Innovation, Work, Organization and Management</em>, Tavistock, Londres, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Riemer, Jeffrey W., <em>Hard Hats: The Work World of Construction Workers</em>, Sage, Beverly Hills, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rinaldi, Steven M., <em>Beyond the Industrial Web: Economic Synergies <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page415" title="415"/>and Targeting Methodologies</em>, tesis, School of Advanced Airpower Studies, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ripin, Kathy M. y Leonard R. Sayles, <em>Insider Strategies for Outsourcing Information Systems: Building Productive Partnerships, Avoiding Seductive Traps</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ripley, William Z., “The Problem of Railway Terminal Operation”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 1926, p.&#160;392.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roberts, Benjamin C., “Affl uence and Disruption”, en William A. Robson (ed.), <em>Man and the Social Sciences</em>, London School of Economics and Political Science, Londres, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Robinson, Joan, <em>The Economics of Imperfect Competition</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rochester, Anna, <em>Labor and Coal</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rodinson, M., “Kabid”, en <em>Encyclopedia of Islam</em>, nueva edición, 10 vols., E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1960-2000, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roethlisberger, Fritz J. y William J. Dickson, <em>Management and the Worker: An Account of a Research Program Conducted by the Western Electric Company, Hawthorne Works, Chicago</em>, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1939.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rogin, Leo, “The New Deal: A Survey of the Literature”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIX</span>, núm.&#160;2, febrero de 1935.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rohter, Larry, “Antiglobalization Forum to Return to a Changed Brazil”, <em>New York Times</em>, 20 de enero de 2003, p. <span class="versalitas bajas">A</span>3.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roland Holst, Henriette, “Der Kampf und die Niederlage der Arbeiter in Holland”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI/2</span>, núm.&#160;30, 22 de abril de 1903, pp.&#160;100-105.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Generalstreik und Sozialdemokratie</em>, Dresden, Kaden &amp; Co., 1905.</p>
    <p class="frances">Romano, Paul [Philip Singer], <em>Life in the Factory</em> [1947], New England Free Press, Boston, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roseberry, William, “Hegemony and the Language of Contention”, en Joseph y Nugent, <em>op. cit</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rosemblatt, Karin A., <em>Gendered Compromises: Political Cultures &amp; <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page416" title="416"/>the State in Chile, 1920-1950</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ross, Arthur M., <em>Trade Union Wage Policy</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rothschild, Ernst, <em>Kartelle, Gewerkschaften und Genossenschaften nach ihrem inneren Zusammenhang im Wirtschaftsleben: Versuch einer theoretischen Grundlegung der Koalitionsbewegung</em>, Julius Springer, Berlín, 1912.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rothschild, K. W., “Price Theory and Oligopoly”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LVII</span>, núm.&#160;227, septiembre de 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roux, Alain, <em>Le Shanghai ouvrier des années trente: coolies, gangsters et syndicalistes</em>, L’Harmattan, París, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Roy, Donald, “Effi ciency and the Fix”, <em>American Journal of Sociology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LX</span>, núm.&#160;3, 1954, pp.&#160;255-266.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Quota Restriction and Goldbricking in a Machine Shop”, <em>American Journal of Sociology</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LVII</span>, núm.&#160;5 marzo de 1952, pp.&#160;427-442.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rubel, Robert C., “Principles of Jointness”, <em>Joint Force Quarterly</em>, núm.&#160;27, invierno de 2000-2001, pp.&#160;48-49.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rubinstein, Ariel, <em>Economics and Language: Five Essays</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rueschemeyer, Dietrich, <em>Power and the Division of Labour</em>, Stanford University, Stanford, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rühle, Otto, Die Spaltung der K.P.D. (<em>Spartakusbund</em>), Bezirks-Sekretariat Ostsachsens, Grossenhain, 1919.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ruiz, David (ed.), <em>Historia de Comisiones Obreras (1968-1988)</em>, Siglo XXI Editores, Madrid, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rumelt, Richard P., “Towards a Strategic Theory of the Firm”, en R. B. Lamb (ed.), <em>Competitive Strategic Management</em>, Prentice-Hall, Nueva York, 1984, pp.&#160;556-570.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al.</em>, “Strategic Management and Economics”, <em>Strategic Management Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>, número especial, invierno de 1991, pp.&#160;5-29.</p>
    <p class="frances">Rutch, Dieter, <em>Modernisierung und neue soziale Bewegungen: Deutschland, Frankreich und USA im Vergleich</em>, Campus, Frankfurt, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page417" title="417"/>Sabel, Charles F., <em>Work and Politics: The Division of Labor in Industry</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Safilios-Rothschild, Constantina, <em>Women and Social Policy</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Said, Edward W., “Foreword”, en <em>Selected Subaltern Studies</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Saint-Simon, Henri, “Catéchisme des industriels [1823]”, <em>Œuvres de Saint-Simon</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> vols., E. Dentu, París, 1868-1876, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “L’Industrie, ou discussions politiques, morales et philosophiques [1817]”, <em>Œuvres de Saint-Simon</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> vols., E. Dentu, París, 1868-1876, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Lettre d’un habitant de Gèneve à ses contemporains [1803]”, Œuvres de Saint-Simon, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> vols., E. Dentu, París, 1868-1876, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;26-47.</p>
    <p class="frances">Salaman, Graeme, <em>Work Organizations: Resistance and Control</em>, Longman, Londres, 1979.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sapelli, Giulio, <em>Organizzazione, lavoro e innovazione industriale nell’Italia tra le due guerre</em>, Rosenberg &amp; Seller, Turín, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sariego, Juan Luis, <em>Enclaves y minerales en el norte de México. Historia social de los mineros de Cananea y Nueva Rosita, 1900-1970</em>, La Casa Chata, México, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sarkar, Sumit, “The Decline of the Subaltern in Subaltern Studies”, en su libro <em>Writing Social History</em>, Oxford University, Delhi, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Savage, Charles H., Jr. y George F. F. Lombard, <em>Sons of the Machine: Case Studies of Social Change in the Workplace</em>, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sayer, Andrew y Richard Walker, <em>The New Social Economy: Reworking the Division of Labor</em>, Blackwell, Cambridge, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sayles, Leonard R., “Discussant’s Comments for ‘Decision-Making in Local Unions’ [de Lawrence B. Cohen]”, <em>Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Meeting</em>, Industrial Relations Research Association, 1955, pp.&#160;313-317.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y George Strauss, <em>Personnel: The Human Problems of Management</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page418" title="418"/>Sayles, Leonard R., y George Strauss, <em>The Local Union: Its Place in the Industrial Plant</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1953.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Behavior of Industrial Work Groups: Prediction and Control</em>, John Wiley, Nueva York, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Human Behavior in Organizations</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Managing Human Resources</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1981, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schama, Simon, <em>Dead Certainties (Unwarranted Speculations)</em>, Alfred A. Knopf, Nueva York, 1991.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schatz, Ronald W., <em>The Electrical Workers: A History of Labor at General Electric and Westinghouse, 1923-1960</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Union Pioneers: The Founders of Local Unions at General Electric and Westinghouse, 1933-1937”, <em>Journal of American History</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">CXVI</span>, 3, diciembre de 1979, p.&#160;595, n.&#160;27.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schelling, Thomas, <em>The Strategy of Conflict</em>, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schelsky, Helmut, “Industrie-und Betriebssoziologie” en Arnold Gehlen y Helmut Schelsky (eds.), <em>Soziologie: Ein Lehrund Handbuch zur modernen Gesellschaftskunde</em>, Eugen Diederichs, Dusseldorf-Colonia, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schluchter, Wolfgang, “Psychophysics and Culture” en Stephen Turner (ed.), <em>The Cambridge Companion to Weber</em>, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000, pp.&#160;59-80.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schmalensee, Richard, “Industrial Organization”, en John Eatwell <em>et al.</em> (eds.), <em>The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics</em>, 4 vols., Macmillan, Londres, 1987, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;803-808.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schmidt, Gert, “Max Weber and Modern Industrial Sociology: A Comment on Some Recent Anglo-Saxon Interpretations”, <em>Sociological Analysis and Theory</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1976, pp.&#160;47-73.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schmidt, Mária, “A Rajk-per és az amerikai kapcsolat”, <em>Korunk</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IX</span>, núm.&#160;5, mayo de 1998, pp.&#160;89-107, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.hhrf.org/korunk/9805/5k15.htm"> <em>www.hhrf.org/korunk/9805/5k15.htm</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page419" title="419"/>Schmitz, Hugo, <em>Technology and Employment Practices in Developing Countries</em>, Croom Helm, Londres, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schmoller, Gustav, “Arbeitseinstellungen und Gewerkvereine: Referat auf der Eisenacher Versammlung vom 6 und 7 Oktober 1872 über die sociale Frage”, <em>Jahrbücher für National Ökonomie und Statistik</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, 2, 1872.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Grundriss der allgemeinen Volkswirthschaftslehre</em> [1912-1917], 2 vols., 3<sup>a</sup>. ed., Duncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig, 1919-1920. Schneider, Erich, <em>Reine Theorie monopolistischer Wirtschaftsformen</em>, J. C. B. Mohr, Tubinga.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zur Theorien des mehrfachen Monopols, insbesondere der des Duopols”, <em>Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft un Sozialpolitik</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, 1930, pp.&#160;550-555.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schneider, Eugene V., <em>Industrial Sociology: The Social Relations of Industry and the Community</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">Schumpeter, Joseph, “The Instability of Capitalism”, <em>Economic Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, septiembre de 1928, .</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical, and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process</em>, 2 vols., McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1939, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy</em>, Harper &amp; Brothers, Nueva York, 1942.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interests, and the Business Cycle</em>, traducción al inglés de Redvers Opie, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung: Eine Untersuchung über Unternehmergewinn, Kapital, Kredit, Zins und den Konjunkturzyklus</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. edición, Duncker und Humblot, Munich, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Theorie der wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung</em>, Duncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig, 1912.</p>
    <p class="frances">Scott, Joan W., “Deconstructing Equality-Versus-Difference: Or, The Uses of Post-Structuralist Theory for Feminism”, <em>Feminist Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>xiv, 1, primavera de 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page420" title="420"/> Scott, Joan W., “Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis”, <em>American Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XLI</span>, 5, diciembre de 1986, pp.&#160;1053-1075.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “On Language, Gender, and Working-Class History”, <em>International Labor and Working-Class History</em>, 31, primavera de 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Glassworkers of Carmaux: French Craftsmen and Political Action in a Nineteenth-Century City</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Scott, William H. <em>et al</em>., <em>Technical Change and Industrial Relations: A Study of the Relations between Technical Change and the Social Structure of a Large Steelworks</em>, Liverpool University, Liverpool, 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">Scranton, Philip, “None-Too-Porous Boundaries: Labor History and the History of Technology”, <em>Technology and Culture</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXIX</span>, 4, octubre de 1988, pp.&#160;722-743.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Figured Tapestry: Production, Markets, and Power in Philadelphia Textiles, 1885-1941</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Segal, Martin, “Factors in Wage Adjustments to Technological Changes”, <em>Industrial and Labor Relations Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;2,enero de 1955, p.&#160;225.</p>
    <p class="frances">Selekman, Benjamin M., <em>Postponing Strikes: A Study of the Industrial Disputes Investigation Act of Canada</em>, Russell Sage Foundation, Nueva York, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Varieties of Labor Relations”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXVII</span>, núm.&#160;2, National Foremen’s Institute, New London, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Labor Relations and Human Relations</em>, Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration, Boston, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Selznick, Philip, <em>The Organizational Weapon: A Study of Bolshevik Strategy and Tactics</em>, Rand, Santa Monica, 1952.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sewell, William H. Jr., “The Concept(s) of Culture”, en Victoria E. Bonnell y Lynn Hunt (eds.), <em>Beyond the Cultural Turn: New Directions in the Study of Society and Culture</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1999, pp.&#160;35-61.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Shachtman, Max, “A Left Wing of the Labor Movement: Two <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page421" title="421"/>Concepts of the Nature and Role of Stalinism”, <em>The New International</em>, septiembre de 1949, p.&#160;209.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shandro, Alan, “‘Consciousness from Without’: Marxism, Lenin and the Proletariat”, <em>Science and Society</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LIX</span>, núm.&#160;3, otoño de 1995, pp.&#160;268-297.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shapiro, Carl, “The Theory of Business Strategy”, RAND Journal of Economics, <span class="versalitas bajas">XX</span>, núm.&#160;1, primavera de 1989, p.&#160;125.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Sharp, Gene, <em>The Politics of Nonviolent Action</em>, 3 vols., Porter Sargent, Boston, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shatzmiller, Maya, <em>Labour in the Medieval Islamic World</em>, E. J. Brill, Leiden, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sheldon, Oliver, <em>The Philosophy of Management</em>, Pittman, Londres, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shils, Edward B., “George W. Taylor: Industrial Peacemaker”, <em>Monthly Labor Review</em>, diciembre de 1995, pp.&#160;29-34.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shubik, M., “A Comparison of Treatments of a Duopoly Problem (segunda parte)”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIII</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Games Decisions and Industrial Organization”, <em>Management Science</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;4, julio de 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Strategy and Market Structure: Competition, Oligopoly, and the Theory of Games</em>, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Nueva York, 1959.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shulevitz, Judith, “The Fall of Man”, reseña de Susan Faludi, <em>Stiffed: The Betrayal of the American Man</em>, William Morrow &amp;  Company, Nueva York, 1999, en <em>The New York Times Book Review</em>, 3 de octubre de 1999, pp.&#160;8-9.</p>
    <p class="frances">Shuttleworth, Kay J. P., “Report”, en National Association for the Promotion of Social Science, <em>Trades’ Societies and Strikes: Report of the Committee on Trades’ Societies</em>, John W. Parker &amp; Son, Londres, 1860, p.&#160;xiii.</p>
    <p class="frances">Siegel, Paul, <em>Uptown, Chicago: The Origins and Emergence of a Movement Against Displacement, 1947-1972</em>, tesis doctoral, University of Illinois, Chicago, 2002.</p>
    <p class="frances">Simmel, Georg, “Philosophie des Geldes” [1900], <em>Gesamtausgabe</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, pp.&#160;462-472.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page422" title="422"/>Simmel, Georg, “Comment les formes sociales se maintiennent”, <em>L’Anne sociologique</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, 1896-1897, pp.&#160;71-109.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Über sociale Differenzierung: Sociologische und psychologische Untersuchunggen” en su <em>Gesamtausabe</em>, 16 vols., Suhrkamp, Frankfurt de Main, 1989 [1890], vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;129-131.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Conflict: The Web of Group-Affiliations</em>, traducción de Kurt H. Wolff y Reinhard Bendix, The Free Press, Nueva York, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Simon, Herbert A., “A Comparison of Organization Theories”, <em>Review of Economic Studies</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XX</span>, núm.&#160;1, 1952-1953, p.&#160;40.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making in Administrative Organization</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Simons, Henry C., “Some Refl ections on Syndicalism” [1941], <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LII</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1944, pp.&#160;1-25.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sirianni, Carmen, <em>Workers’ Control and Socialist Democracy</em>, Verso, Londres, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">Slichter, Sumner H., “Impact of Social Security Legislation upon Mobility and Enterprise”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXX</span>, núm.&#160;1, suplemento, marzo de 1940, p.&#160;57.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Changing Character of American Industrial Relations”, American Economic Review, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXIX</span>, núm.&#160;1, suplemento, marzo de 1939, p.&#160;130.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Modern Economic Society</em>, Henry Holt, Nueva York, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Union Policies and Industrial </em>, Brookings, Washington, 1941.</p>
    <p class="frances">Smelser, Neil J., <em>The Sociology of Economic Life</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Smith, Bonnie G., “One Question for Roger Chartier”, <em>French Historical Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXI</span>, 2, primavera de 1998, p.&#160;219.</p>
    <p class="frances">Smith, Neil, <em>Uneven Development: Nature, Capital and the Production of Space</em>, Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">Smithies, Arthur y L. J. Savage, “A Dynamic Problem in Duopoly”, <em>Econometrica</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1940.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page423" title="423"/>Smithies, Arthur, “Optimum Location in Spatial Competition”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXIX</span>, núm.&#160;3, junio de 1941, pp.&#160;428, 431-432.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sofer, Cyril, <em>Organizations in Theory and Practice</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Solomon, Deborah y Yochi J. Dreazen, “Verizon Hit by Strike, but Talks Progress”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 7 de agosto de 2000, pp.&#160;A3.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Striking Unions and Verizon Keep Talking”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 8 de agosto de 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sorel, Georges, <em>Réflections sur la violence</em>, 11a. ed., Libraire Marcel Rivière et Cie., París, 1950.</p>
    <p class="frances">Soule, George, <em>Economic Forces in American History</em>, William Sloane Associates, Nueva York, 1952.</p>
    <p class="frances">Spalding, Hobart A., Jr., <em>Organized Labor in Latin America: Historical Case Studies of Workers in Dependent Societies</em>, New York University, Nueva York, 1977</p>
    <p class="frances">Special Committee on Education for Management [Lyndall F. Urwick, presidente], Ministry of Education, <em>Education for Management: Management Subjects in Technical and Commercial Colleges</em>, hmso, Londres, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Spence, A. Michael, “Investment Strategy and Growth in a New Market”, <em>Bell Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">X</span>, núm.&#160;1, primavera de 1979, pp.&#160;1-19.</p>
    <p class="frances">Spencer, Herbert, <em>The Principles of Sociology</em>, 3a. ed. autorizada, 3 vols., D. Appleton &amp; Co., Nueva York, 1897.</p>
    <p class="frances">Spielrein, Isaak N., “Zur Theorie der Psychotechnik: Vortrag, gehalten auf der <span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>. Internationalen Konferenz für Psychotechnik, Moskau, 9. Septiembre 1931”, en Michael Erdélyi <em>et al</em>., <em>Prinzipienfragen der Psychotechnik: Abhandlungen über Begriff und Ziele der Psychotechnik und der praktischen Psychologie</em>, Johann Ambrosius Barth, Leipzig, 1933, pp.&#160;31-51.</p>
    <p class="frances">Spivak, Gayatri, “Editor’s Note”, en <em>Selected Subaltern Studies</em>, p.&#160;xii.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Subaltern Studies: Deconstructing Historiography”, en <em>Selected Subaltern Studies</em>, pp.&#160;14-15.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page424" title="424"/>Sraffa, Piero, “Sulle relazioni fra costo e quantità prodotta”, <em>Annali di economia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, 1925-1926.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Laws of Returns under Competitive Conditions”, Economic Journal, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, diciembre de 1926, pp.&#160;539-550.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stackelberg, Heinrich von, “Grundlagen einer reinen Kostentheorie, Zweiter Teil”, <em>Zeitschrift fur Nationalökonomie</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, núm. 4, mayo de 1932.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Marktform und Gleichgewicht</em>, Julius Springer, Viena, 1934.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stalin, José, “1. Organizatsionnyi otchët tsentral’nogo komiteta <span class="versalitas bajas">RKP</span> (b), 17 aprelia [Informe organizacional del comité central del <span class="versalitas bajas">PCR</span> (B.), 17 de abril de 1923]”, Sochineniia, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, pp.&#160;97-222.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Dve skhvatki (po povodu 9 ianvaria) [Dos enfrentamientos (1905)]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;201-203.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “K voprosam leninizma”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VIII</span>, pp.&#160;13-90.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “K voprosy o strategii y taktike russkikh kommunistov”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, pp.&#160;160-180.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Nashi raznoglasiia [Nuestros desacuerdos, 5 de enero de 1921], <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, pp.&#160;4-14.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O politicheskoi strategii i taktike russkikh kommunistov: Nabrosok plana broshiury [Táctica y estrategia políticas de los comunistas rusos: Sinopsis de un panfleto, julio 1921]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, pp.&#160;62-87.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Ob osnovakh leninisma: Lektsii chitannye v Sverd’lovskom universitete”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, pp.&#160;69-188.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Oktiabr’skaia revoliutsiia i taktika russkikh kommunistov: Predislovie k knige ‘Na putiakh k Oktiabriu’ [La Revolución de octubre y las tácticas de los comunistas rusos (1924)]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, pp.&#160;363, 380-385.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Partiia do i posle vziatiia vlasti [El partido antes y después de tomar el poder, 28 de agosto de 1921]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, 104-112 (citas, pp.&#160;108, 112).</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Sovremennyi moment i ob’edinitel’nyi s’ezd rabochei partii [La situación actual y el congreso de unidad del partido de los trabajadores (1906)]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, p.&#160;270.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page425" title="425"/>Stalin, José, “Vooruzhënnoe vosstanie i nasha taktika [Insurrección armada y nuestras tácticas (1905)]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 16 vols. (13 publicados), Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Politicheskoi Literatury, Moscú, 1946-67, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;133-137.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stark, Louis, “Auto Union Votes a General Strike in G.M.C. Plants”, <em>New York Times</em>, 4 de enero de 1937, pp.&#160;1-2.</p>
    <p class="frances">Steadman Jones, <em>Gareth, Languages of Class: Studies in English Working Class History, 1832-1982</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stearns, Peter N., <em>Revolutionary Syndicalism and French Labor: A Cause Without Rebels</em> Rutgers University, New Brunswick, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stein, Philipp, <em>Über Streiks und Aussperrungen</em>, Zahn &amp; Jaensch, Dresden, 1907.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stern, Steve J., <em>The Secret History of Gender: Women, Men, and Power in Late Colonial Mexico</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Steuben, John, S<em>trike Strategy, Gaer Associates</em>, Nueva York, 1950.</p> 
    <p class="frances">Stevens, Carl M., <em>Strategy and Collective Bargaining Negotiation</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stewart, Perry E., <em>San Francisco Scavengers; Dirty Work and the Pride of Ownership</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sting, Kurt, “ Die polypolitische Preisbildung”, <em>Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">CXXXIV</span>, núm.&#160;5, mayo de 1931, pp.&#160;761-789.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stocking, George W. y Willard F. Mueller, “The Cellophane Case and the New Competition”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versañitas">XLV</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stoke, Harold W., “Economic Influences Upon the Corporation Laws of New Jersey”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVIII</span>, núm.&#160;5, octubre de 1930, pp.&#160;551, 565;</p>
    <p class="frances">Stolberg, Benjamin, <em>The Story of the  <span class="versalitas bajas">CIO</span></em> , Viking Press, Nueva York, 1938.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stoltzmann, Rudolf, <em>Der Zweck in der Volkswirtschaft als sozial-ethisches Zweckgebilde</em>, Puttkammer &amp; Mühlbrecht, Berlín, 1909.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page426" title="426"/>Stoltzmann, Rudolf, <em>Die soziale Kategorie in der Volkswirthschaftslehre</em>, Puttkammer &amp; Mühlbrecht, Berlín, 1896.</p>
    <p class="frances">Stone, Katherine, “The Origins of Job Structures in the Steel Industry”, <em>Review of Radical Political Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VI</span>, núm.&#160;2, verano de 1974, pp.&#160;61-67.</p>
    <p class="frances">Storper, Michael y Richard Walker, <em>The Capitalist Imperative: Territory, Technology and Industrial Growth</em>, Blackwell, Nueva York, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Strati, Antonio, <em>Theory and Method in Organization Studies: Paradigms and Choices</em>, Sage, Londres, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Strauss, George, “Unions in the Building Trades”, <em>The University of Buffalo Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>, núm.&#160;2, junio de 1958, pp.&#160;113-116.</p>
    <p class="frances">Strumilin, Stanislav G., <em>Izbrannye proizvedeniia</em>, 5 vols., Nauka, Moscú, 1963-65.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Na Planovom Fronte [1921-], Nauka, Moscú, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sturmthal, Adolf, “The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions”, <em>Industrial and Labor Relations Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, núm.&#160;3, abril de 1950, pp.&#160;375-382.</p>
    <p class="frances">Suttles, Gerald D., <em>The Social Order of the Slum: Ethnicity and Territory in the Inner City</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1968.</p>
    <p class="frances">Svechin, A., Strategiia, 2a. ed., Voennyi Vestnik, Moscú, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">Sweezy <em>et al</em>., “Notes on Elasticity of Substitution”, <em>Review of Economic Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;1, octubre de 1933, pp.&#160;67-78.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tamarin, David, <em>The Argentine Labor Movement, 1930-1945: A Study in the Origins of Peronism</em>, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tannenbaum, Arnold S., “Unions”, en James G. March (ed.), <em>Handbook of Organizations</em>, Rand McNally, Chicago, 1965, pp.&#160;733-734.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tannenbaum, Frank, <em>The Labor Movement: Its Conservative Functions and Social Consequences</em>, Putnam, Nueva York, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tarbell, Ida M., “The History of the Standard Oil Company”, <em>McClure’s Magazine</em>, marzo de 1903, pp.&#160;496, julio de 1903, pp.&#160;316 y 320.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., <em>Steel Strike: A Case Study in Industrial Relations</em>, Batsford Academic and Educational, Londres, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page427" title="427"/>Tarbell, Ida M.,<em> The History of the Standard Oil Company</em>, 2 vols., McClure, Phillips, Nueva York, 1904.</p>
    <p class="frances">Taussig, Frank W., <em>Principles of Economics</em>, 2 vols., Macmillan, Nueva York, 1912, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Wages and Capital: An Examination of the Wages Fund Doctrine</em>, D. Appleton and Company, Nueva York, 1896.</p>
    <p class="frances">Taylor, Carl C., “Official Reports and Proceedings: Section Chairmen for Forty-First Annual Meeting”, <em>American Sociological Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, núm.&#160;4, agosto de 1946, p.&#160;445.</p>
    <p class="frances">Taylor, Fred W., “A Piece-Rate System: Being a Step Toward Partial Solution of the Labor Problem”, <em>Economic Studies</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, 2, junio de 1896.</p>
    <p class="frances">Taylor, Overton H., “Economic Theory and Certain Non-Economic Elements in Social Life”, en <em>Explorations in Economics: Notes and Essays Contributed in Honor of F. W. Taussig</em>, McGrawHill, Nueva York, 1936, pp.&#160;381-388 (las cursivas son suyas).</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Economics and Liberalism: Collected Papers</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tead, Ordway, <em>Instincts in Industry: A Study of Working-Class Psychology</em>, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">Teece, David J. <em>et al</em>., “Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management”, <em>Strategic Management Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XVIII</span>, núm.&#160;7, agosto de 1997, pp.&#160;509-533.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tejada, Carlos, “Verizon Reaches Tentative Pact With Unions on Five-Year Deal”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 5 de septiembre de 2003.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tenfelde, Klaus (ed.), “Arbeiter und Arbeiterbewegung im Vergleich: Berichte zur internationalen historischen Forschung”, <em>Historische Zeitschrift-Sonderhefte</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, 1986).</p>
    <p class="frances">Terkel, Studs, ed., <em>Working: People Talk about What They Do All Day and How They Feel about What They Do</em>, Pantheon, Nueva York, 1974.</p>
    <p class="frances">Terrill, Robert P., “Cartels and the International Exchange of Technology”, <em>American Economic Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXVI</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thälmann, Ernst, “Zu unserer Strategie und Taktik im Kampf ge<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page428" title="428"/>gen den Faschismus [1932]”, en Thälmann, Ernst, <em>Reden und Aufsätze</em>, 1930-1933, 2 vols., Rote Fahne, Colonia, 1975, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, pp.&#160;114-145.</p>
    <p class="frances">Therborn, Göran, “Why Some Classes Are More Successful than Others”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;138, marzo-abril de 1983, pp.&#160;40-41.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Why Some Classes Are More Successful Than Others”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;138, marzo-abril de 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Into the 21st Century: The New Parameters of Global Politics”, <em>New Left Review</em>, segunda serie, núm.&#160;10, julio de 2001, pp.&#160;87-110.</p>
    <p class="frances"><em>Third World Congress of the Red International of Labor Unions: Resolutions and Decisions</em>, Trade Union Educational League, Chicago, 1924.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thomas, Keith, ed., <em>The Oxford Book of Work</em>, Oxford University, Oxford, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thompson, E. P., <em>The Making of the English Working Class</em>, Victor Gollancz, Londres, 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thompson, James D., <em>Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y F. L. Bates, “Technology, Organization and Administration”, <em>Administrative Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span> 1957, pp.&#160;325-343.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thompson, Paul, <em>The Nature of Work: An Introduction to Debates on the Labour Process</em>, 2a. ed., Macmillan, Londres, 1989.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thompson, William, <em>Labour Rewarded</em>, Londres, 1827.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thornton, William T., <em>On Labour: Its Wrongful Claims and Rightful Dues, Its Actual Present and Possible Future</em>, Macmillan, Londres, 1869.</p>
    <p class="frances">Thoroughgood, B. K., “Mechanism”, en Lionel S. Marks (ed.), <em>Mechanical Engineers’ Handbook</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1916, p.&#160;652).</p>
    <p class="frances">Thurner, Mark, <em>From Two Republics to One Divided: Contradictions of Postcolonial Nationmaking in Andean Peru</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tilgher, Adriano, <em>Work: What It Has Been to Men through the Ages</em>, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page429" title="429"/>traducción al inglés de Dorothy C. Fisher, G. G. Harrap, Londres, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tilly, Charles, “Population and Pedagogy in France”, <em>History of Education Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIII</span>, 2, verano de 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, From Mobilization to Revolution, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Contentious French</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tilly, Chris, y Charles Tilly, “Capitalist Work and Labor Markets”, en Neil J. Smelser y Richard Swedberg (eds.), <em>The Handbook of Economic Sociology</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Charles Tilly, <em>Work under Capitalism</em>, Boulder, Westview, 1998.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tilly, Louise A. y Joan W. Scott, <em>Women, Work, and Family</em>, Rinehart &amp;  Winston, Holt, Nueva York, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tinbergen, Jan, “Bestimmung und Deutung von Angebotskurven: Ein Beispiel”, Zeitschrift fur Nationalökonomie, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, núm.&#160;5, abril de 1930, pp.&#160;675-679.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tinsman, Heidi, “Household Patrones: Wife-Beating and Sexual Control in Rural Chile, 1964-1988”, en French y James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Durham, Duke University, 1997, pp.&#160;264-296.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tirole, Jean, <em>The Theory of Industrial Organization</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">MIT</span>, Cambridge, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">Toby Harfield, “Strategic Management and Michael Porter: A Postmodern Reading”, <em>Electronic Journal of Radical Organisation Theory</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, núm.&#160;1, agosto de 1998, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.mngt.waikato.ac.nz/depts/sml/journal/ejrot.htm"></a><em>www.mngt.waikato.ac.nz/depts/sml/journal/ejrot.htm</em>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Todes, Charlotte, <em>Labor and Lumber</em>, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1931.</p>
    <p class="frances">Togliatti, Palmiro, “Attualità del pensiero e dell’azione di Gramsci”, <em>Rinascita</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XIV</span>, 4, abril de 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Lectures on Fascism</em> [1935], traducción al inglés de Daniel Dichter, International Publishers, Nueva York, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page430" title="430"/>Tolliday, Steven y Jonathan Zeitlin, “Shop Floor bargaining, Contract Unionism, and Job Control: An On-the-Job Comparison”, en Lichtenstein y Meyer (eds.), <em>On the Line: Essays in the History of Auto Work</em>, Urbana, University of Illinois.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tomlins, Christopher L., “<span class="versalitas bajas">AFL</span> Unions in the 1930s: Their Performance in Historical Perspective”, Journal of American History, <span class="versalitas bajas">CXV</span>, 4, marzo de 1979, pp.&#160;1025.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The State and the Unions: Labor Relations, Law, and the Organized Labor Movement in America, 1880-1960</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Tosdal, Harry R., “Operating Problems of Branch Sales Organizations”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, núm.&#160;1, octubre de 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Field Organization of the Sales Department”, <em>Harvard Business Review</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span> núm.&#160;3, abril de 1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">Touraine, Alain, <em>L’évolution du travail ouvrier aux usines Renault</em>, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, París, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">— <em>et al</em>., <em>Solidarité: Analyse d’un mouvement sociale, Pologne, 1980-1981</em>, Fayard, París, 1982.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>La conscience ouvrière</em>, Seuil, París, 1966.</p>
    <p class="frances">Trempé, Rolande, <em>Les mineurs de Carmaux, 1848-1914</em>, 2 vols., Éditions Ouvrières, París, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Trist, Eric L. y K.W. Bamforth, “Some Social and Psychological Consequences of the Logwall Method of Coal-Getting: An Examination of the Psychological Situation and Defences of a Work Group in relation to the Social Structure and Technological Content of the Work System”, <em>Human Relations</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, núm.&#160;1, 1951, pp.&#160;3-38.</p>
    <p class="frances">Trombetti, Gustavo, “In cella con la matricola 7047 (detenuto politico A. Gramsci)”, <em>Rinascita</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, 9, septiembre de 1946.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Piantone’ di Gramsci nel carcere di Turi”, <em>Rinascita</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII</span>, 18, 1° de mayo de 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">Trotski, Leon, “A Strategy of Action and Not of Speculation-Letter to Pekin Friends [1932]”, <em>Class Struggle</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, núm.&#160;6, junio de 1933.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page431" title="431"/>Trotski, Leon, “Die Entwicklungstendenzen der russischen Sozialdemokratie”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXVIII/2</span> , núm.&#160;50, 9 de septiembre, 1910, pp.&#160;860-871.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Khoziaistvennoe polozhenie respubliki i osnovnye zadachi vosstanovlennia promishlennosti (Doklad na zasedanii fraktsii Vserossiiskogo Tsentral’nogo Soveta professional’nykh soiuzov, 12 ianvaria, 1920 g.)”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Nasha revoliutsia [1907]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 21 vols. (12 publicados), Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1920-27, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>., “Novaia ekonomicheskaia politika Sovetskoi Rossii i perspektivii mirovoi revolutsii”, Sochineniia, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “O trudovoi distsipline (Rech’ na mitinge v Muromskikh zheleznodorozhnykh masterskikh 21 iiunia 1920 g.)”,<em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;365-371.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Organizatsiia truda (Doklad na ix s’ezde rkp (b) [30 de marzo de 1920])”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;129-163.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Osnovnye zadachi i trudnosti khoziaistvennogo stroitel’stva (doklad na zasedanii moskovskogo komiteta rkp [b], 6 ianvaria 1920 g.)”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 21 vols.,(12 publicados), Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo, 1920-1927, Moscú, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span></p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Profsoiuzy i militarizatsiia truda (rech’ na III Vserossiiskom s’ezde professional’nykh soiuzov, 9 aprelia 1920 g.)”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;178-196.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ na rasshirennom plenume Tsektrana, 2 dekabria 1920 g.”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XV</span>, pp.&#160;410-438.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Rech’ na Vserossiskom s’ezde transportnykh rabochikh 17 marta 1921 g.” Discurso ante el Congreso Ruso de los Trabajadores del Transporte (27 de marzo de 1921)”,  <em>Sochineniia</em>,vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>1905</em> [1907, 1909], trad. al inglés de Anya Bostock, Nueva York, Vintage, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Die russische Revolution 1905 [1909], 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Vereinigung Internationaler Verlagsanstalten, Berlín, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Moia Zhizn’: opyt avtobiografii</em>, 2 vols., Izdatel’stvo Granit, Berlín, 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page432" title="432"/>Trotski, Leon, <em>On the Trade Unions</em> [1923-1939], Merit Publishers, Nueva York, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Terrorismus und Kommunismus: Anti-Kautsky</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., Kommunistische Internationale, Hamburgo (Carl Hoym Nachf., Louis Cahnbley), 1921, pp. 111-126.</p>
    <p class="frances">Trotter, Joe William, Jr., <em>Black Milwaukee: The Making of an Industrial Proletariat, 1915-1945</em>, University of Illinois, Urbana, 1985. Tugan-Baranowski, Mijail I., <em>Soziale Theorie der Verteilung</em>, Julius Springer, Berlín, 1913.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Promyshlennye krizisy:ocherk iz sotsial’noi istorii Anglii</em>, 2<sup>a</sup> ed., O. N, Popovoi, San Petersburgo, 1900.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Russkaia fabrika v proshlom i nastoiashchem: istorikoeko no mischeskoe issliedovanie</em>, L. F. Pantelieeva, San Petersburgo, 1898.</p>
    <p class="frances">Turner, Arthur N. y Paul R. <em>Lawrence, Industrial Jobs and the Worker: An Investigation of Response to Task Attributes</em>, Harvard Business School, Boston, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">Turner, George E., <em>Victory Rode the Rails: The Strategic Place of the Railroads in the Civil War</em>, Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis, 1953. </p>
    <p class="frances">Turner, Ralph H., “Determinants of Social Movement Strategies”, en Tamotsu Shibutani (ed.), <em>Human Nature and Collective Behavior: Papers in Honor of Herbert Blumer</em>, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1970.</p>
    <p class="frances">Ulman, Lloyd, <em>The Rise of the National Trade Union: The Development and Signifi cance of Its Structure</em>, Governing Institutions and Economics Policies, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1955, pp.&#160;442-459.</p>
    <p class="frances">Useem, Michael, <em>Conscription, Protest, and Social Conflict: The Life and Death of a Draft Resistance Movement</em>, Wiley, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page433" title="433"/>Usher, Abbot P. <em>A History of Mechanical Inventions</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vallas, Steven P., <em>Power in the Workplace: The Politics of Production at AT&amp;T </em>, State University of New York, Albany, 1993.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vanderblue, Homer B., “Rairoad Evaluation by the Interstate Commerce Commission”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIV</span>, núm.&#160;1, noviembre de 1919.</p>
    <p class="frances"></p>
    <p class="frances">Vandervelde, Émile, “Nochmals das belgische Experiment”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XX/2</span>, núm.&#160;6, 7 de mayo de 1902, pp.&#160;166-169.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vasilash, Ggary S., “Talking Pressworking”, <em>Automotive Design and Production</em>, abril de 1998, <a target="_blank" href="http://www.autofieldguide.com"><em>en www.autofieldguide.com</em></a>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vaughan, Mary Kay, “Cultural Approaches to Peasant Politics in the Mexican Revolution”, <em>Hispanic Amrican Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 2, mayo de 1999, pp.&#160;269-305.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Cultural Politics in Revolution: Teachers, Peasants, and Schools in Mexico, 1930-1940</em>, University of Arizona, Tucson, 1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">Veblen, Thorstein, “Outline of a Policy for the Control of the ‘Economic Penetration’ of Backward Countries and of Foreign Investments [1917]”, en <em>Thorstein Veblen, Essays In Our Changing Order</em>, Viking, Nueva York, 1934, pp.&#160;372.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Economic Consequences of the Peace [1920]”, en <em>Thorstein Veblen, Essays In Our Changing Order</em>, Viking, Nueva York, 1934, pp.&#160;456, 463 y 468.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Absentee Ownership: Business Enterprise in Recent Times: The Case of America</em>, B. W. Heubsch, Nueva York, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Engineers and the Price System</em>, B. W. Huebsch, Nueva York, 1921.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the Industrial Arts</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1914.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Nature of Peace</em>, Macmillan, Nueva York, 1917.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Theory of Business Enterprise</em>, Charles Scribner’s Sons, Nueva York, 1904.</p>
    <p class="frances">Veccia, Theresa R., “‘My Duty as a Woman’: Gender Ideology, Work, and Working-Class Women’s Lives in São Paulo, Brazil, 1900-1950”, en French y James (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page434" title="434"/>Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;100-146</p>
    <p class="frances">Vickrey, William, “Utility, Strategy, and Social Decision Rules”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIV</span>, núm.&#160;4, noviembre de 1960.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vincent C. Peloso, <em>Peasants on Plantations: Subaltern Strategies of Labor and Resistance in the Pisco Valley</em>, Peru, Duke University, Durham, 1999.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vladimir I. Lenin, “War and Revolution”, en Vladimir I. Lenin, <em>Collected Works</em>, 45 vols., Editorial Progreso, Moscú, 1960-1970, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Vliegen, W. H., “Der Generalstreik als politisches Kampfmittel”, <em>Die Neue Zeit</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXII/1</span>, núm.&#160;7, s. f., ¿11 de noviembre?, 1903, pp.&#160;192-199. <em>Voprosy stachechnoi taktiki: Resheniia mezhdunarodnoi stachechnoi konferentsii v Strasburge v ianvare 1929 g.</em>, Pronfiterna, Moscú, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">Voto, Bernard de, “A Primer for Intellectuals”, <em>Saturday Review of Literature</em>, 22 de abril de 1933, pp.&#160;1-2.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Importance of Pareto”, <em>Saturday Review of Literature.</em></p>
    <p class="frances">Wagner, Adolph, <em>Allgemeine oder theoretische Volkswirthschaftslehre: Grundlegung</em>, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., revisada y aumentada, C. F. Winter, Leipzig, 1879.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wald, A., “Book Reviews”, <em>Review of Economic Statistics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXIX</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walder, Andrew G., <em>Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority in Chinese Industry</em>, University of California, Berkeley, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walker, Charles R., <em>Steeltown: An Industrial Case History of the Conflict between Progress and Security</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1950. y Robert H. Guest, <em>The Man on the Assembly Line</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1952.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Toward the Automatic Factory</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1957.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page435" title="435"/>Walker, Charles R, <em>American City: A Rank-and-File History</em>, Farrar &amp; Rinehart, Nueva York, 1937.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walker, Francis A., <em>The Wages Question: A Treatise on Wages and the Wages Class</em>, Henry Holt and Company, Nueva York, 1876.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walker, Kenneth F., <em>Industrial Relations in Australia</em>, Harvard University, Cambridge, 1956, pp.&#160;345-353.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walker, Richard, “Contentious Issues in Marxian Value and Rent Theory: A Second and Longer Look”, <em>Antipode</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núm.&#160;1, abril de 1975, pp.&#160;31-54.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Michael Storper, “The Theory of Labor and the Theory of Location”, <em>International Journal of Urban and Regional Research</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1983, pp.&#160;1-41.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Is There a Service Economy”, <em>Science and Society</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIX</span>, núm.&#160;1, primavera de 1985, pp.&#160;42-83.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Machinery, Labour and Location”, en Stephen Wood (ed.), <em>The Degradation of Work?</em>, Unwin Hyman, Londres, 1989, pp.&#160;59-90.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wallace, Michael, Kevin T. Leicht y Don S. Grant, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, “Positional Power, Class and Individual Earnings Inequality: Advancing New Structuralist Explanations”, <em>Sociological Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIV</span>, núm.&#160;1, primavera de 1993, pp.&#160;85-109.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Larry J. Griffin y Beth A. Rubin, “The Positional Power of American Labor, 1963-1977”, <em>American Sociological Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LIV</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1989, pp.&#160;197-241.</p>
    <p class="frances">Walras, León, “Études d’économie politique appliquée [1875]”, pp.&#160;200, 247-248.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Cours d’économie politique appliquée” [1872-1881], en Auguste y Léon Walras, <em>Œuvres économiques complètes</em>, 12 vols., París, Economica, 1987-1997, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">xII</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Éléments d’économie politique pure, ou Théorie de la richesse sociale” [1874], en Auguste y Léon Walras, <em>Œuvres économiques complètes</em>, 12 vols., París, Economica, 1987-1997.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “La loi fédérale sur le travail dans les fabriques” [1875], en Auguste y Léon Walras, <em>Œuvres économiques complètes</em>, 12 vols., París, Economica, 1987-1997, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">VII</span>, p.&#160;223.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page436" title="436"/>Walsh, Vivian, <em>Rationality, Allocation, and Reproduction</em>, Clarendon, Oxford, 1996.</p>
    <p class="frances">Warner, W. Lloyd y J. O. Low, <em>The Social System of the Modern Factory-The Strike: A Social Analysis</em>, Yale University, New Haven, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">Warren, Susan y Melanie Trottman, “When Plug Is Pulled On the Digital Age, The Basics Black Out”, <em>Wall Street Journal</em>, 15 de agosto de 2003.</p>
    <p class="frances">Washbrook, David, “Orients and Occidents: Colonial Discourse Theory and the Historiography of the British Empire”, en W. Roger Lewis, editor en jefe, <em>The Oxford History of the British Empire</em>, 5 vols., Oxford University, Oxford, 1998-1999, vol. v, pp.&#160;596-611.</p>
    <p class="frances">Webb, Sidney, <em>Industrial Democracy</em>, Longmans, Green &amp; Co., Londres, 1897.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Beatrice Webb, “Primitive Democracy in British Trade Unionism, i”, <em>Political Science Quarterly</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">XI</span>, 3, septiembre de 1896.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Beatrice Webb, <em>Industrial Democracy: Edition of 1920, With New Introduction</em>, Longmans, Green and Co., Londres, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Beatrice, <em>The History of Trade Unionism</em>, Longmans, Green &amp; Co., Londres, 1894.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Beatrice, <em>Theorie und Praxis der englischen Gewerkvereine</em> (Industrial Democracy), traducción al alemán de C. Hugo, 2 vols., J. H. W. Dietz Nachf., Stuttgart, 1898, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;27, 161, 193 y 195; vol. ii, pp. 183-184, 189-190, 195-196, 202, 216, 218, 241, 315, 322, 327-328, 334, 351, 386 y 395.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Harold Cox, <em>The Eight Hours Day</em>, Walter Scott, Londres, 1891.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weber, Alfred, “Reine Theorie des Standorts [1909]”, en Weber, Alfred, <em>et al.</em>, <em>Über den Standort der Industrien</em>, 2 vols., J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tubinga, 1909-1931, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, pp.&#160;121-163.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weber, Max, “Der Sozialismus” [1918], en <em>Soziologie und Sozialpolitik</em>, pp.&#160;512-518.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page437" title="437"/>Weber, Max, “Innere Lage und Aussenpolitik” [1918], en Max Weber, <em>Gesammelte politische Schriften</em>, J. C. B. Mohr, Tubinga, 1958, 2<sup>a</sup>. ed., revisada, pp.&#160;280-281.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Methodologische Einleitung für die Erhebungen des Vereins für Sozialpolitik über Auslese und Anpassung (Berufswahlen und Berufsschicksal) der Arbeiterschaft der geschlossenen Grossindustrie” [1908], en <em>Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Soziologie und Sozialpolitik</em>, J. C. B., Mohr [Paul Siebeck], Tubinga, 1924, pp.&#160;1-60.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Parlament und Regierung im neugeordneten Deutschland” [1918], en <em>Gesammelte politische Schriften</em>, pp.&#160;354, 392-393.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Politik als Beruf” [1919], <em>Gesammelte politische Schriften</em> , pp.&#160;540-541.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Über einige Kategorien der verstehenden Soziologie”   [1913], en Max Weber, <em>Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre</em>, J.C.B. Boher [Paul Siebeck], Tubinga, 1922, pp.&#160;417-440.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zur Methodik sozial-psychologischer Enqueten und ihrer Bearbeitung”, <em>Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik</em>, núm.&#160;29, 1909, pp.&#160;949-958.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Zur Psychophysik der industriellen Arbeit” [1908-1909], en <em>Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Soziologie und Sozialpolitik</em>, pp.&#160;61-255.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Economy and Society</em>, editado por Guenther Roth y Claus Wittich, traducción de Ephraim Fischoff <em>et al.</em>, 2 vols., University of California, Berkeley, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Theory of Social and Economic Organization</em>, traducción al inglés de A. M. Henderson y Talcott Parsons, Free Press, Nueva York, 1947.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Wirtschaft und Gessellschaft: III Abteilung, Grundiss der Sozialökonomie</em>, J.C.B. Boher [Paul Siebeck], Tubinga, 1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wedderburn, Dorothy y Rosemary Crompton, <em>Workers’ Attitudes y Technology</em>, Cambridge University, Cambridge, 1972.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weick, Karl E., <em>The Social Psychology of Organizing</em>, Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1969.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page438" title="438"/>Weil, David, “A Strategic Choice Framework for Union Decision-Making”, manuscrito, noviembre de 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Turning the Tide: Strategic Planning for Labor Unions</em>, Lexington Books, Nueva York, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weinstein, Allen, <em>Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case</em>, Knopf, Nueva York, 1978</p>
    <p class="frances">Weinstein, Barbara, “Buddy, Can You Spare a Paradigm?: Reflections on Generational Shifts and Latin American History”, <em>The Americas</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LVII</span>, 4, abril de 2001, pp.&#160;460-461.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Unskilled Worker, Skilled Housewife: Constructing  the Working-Class Woman in São Paulo, Brazil”, en John D. French y Daniel James, (eds.), <em>The Gendered Worlds of Latin American Women Workers: From Household and Factory to the Union Hall and Ballot Box</em>, Duke University, Durham, 1997, pp.&#160;72-99.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weir, Robert E. y James P. Hanlan (eds.), <em>Historical Encyclopedia of American Labor</em>, 2 vols., Greenwood, Westport, 2004.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wellington, Harry H. y Ralph K. Winter, Jr., <em>The Unions and the Cities</em>, Brookings, Washington, 1971.</p>
    <p class="frances">Welskopp, Thomas, <em>Arbeit und Macht im Hüttenwerk: Arbeits-und industrielle Beziehungen in der deutschen und amerikanischen Eisenund Stahlindustrie von der 1860er bis zu den 1930er Jahren</em>, J. H. W. Dietz Nachfolger, Bonn, 1994.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Das Banner der Brüderlichkeit: Die deutsche Sozialdemokratie vom Vormärz bis zum Sozialistengesetz</em>, J. W. H. Dietz Nachfolger, Bonn, 2000.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wernerfelt, Birger, “A Resource-Based View of the Firm”, <em>Strategic Management Journal</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;2, abril de 1984, pp.&#160;171-180.</p>
    <p class="frances">Weston, J. Fred, “Some Theoretical Aspects of Formula Timing Plans”, <em>Journal of Business of the University of Chicago</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXII</span>, núm.&#160;4, octubre de 1949.</p>
    <p class="frances">Whannel, Paddy y Stuart Hall, “Direct Action?”, <em>New Left Review</em>, núm.&#160;8, marzo-abril de 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wheeler, W. Morton, <em>Les Sociétés d’insectes: leur origine, leur évolution</em>, Gaston Doin et Cie., París, 1926.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page439" title="439"/>Wheeler, W. Morton, <em>The Social Insects: Their Origin and Evolution</em>, Harcourt, Brace and Company, Nueva York, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">Whitehead, Thomas N., <em>The Industrial Worker: A Statistical Study of Human Relations in a Group of Manual Workers</em>, 2 vols., Harvard University, Cambridge, 1938</p>
    <p class="frances">Whittlesey, Charles R., “The Stevenson Plan: Some Conclusions and Observations”, <em>Journal of Political Economy</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XXXIX</span>, núm.&#160;4, agosto de 1931, pp.&#160;522, 524.</p>
    <p class="frances">Whyte, William F., <em>Human Relations in the Restaurant Industry</em>, McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Men at Work</em>, Homewood, Dorsey, 1961.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, Whyte, William F., <em>Money and Motivation: An Analysis of Incentives in Industry</em>, Harper, Nueva York, 1955.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wicksell, Knut, <em>Über Wert, Kapital und Rente nach den neueren nationalökonomischen Theorien</em>, Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1893.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Vorlesungen über Nationalökonomie auf Grundlage des Marginalprinzipes </em>[1901-1906], 2 vols., Gustav Fischer, Jena, 1913-1922.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wicksell, Kurt, “Mathematische Nationalökonomie”, <em>Archive für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LVIII</span>, núm.&#160;2, 1927.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wieser, Ferdinand von, “Arma Virumque Cano” [1907], <em>Abhandlungen</em>, p.&#160;337.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wieser, Friedrich von, “Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirtschaft” [1914], en Sally Altmann <em>et al.</em>, Grundriss der Sozialökonomik, 9 vols., J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tubinga, 1914-1927, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Theorie der gesellschaftlichen Wirtschaft”, <em>Recht und Macht: Sechs Vorträge</em>, Buncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig, 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Über die gesellschaftlichen Gewalten” [1901], en <em>Friedrich von Wieser, Gesammmelte Abhandlungen</em>, J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tubinga, 1929.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Der natürliche Werth</em>, Alfred Hölder, Viena, 1889.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Recht und Macht: Sechs Vorträge</em>, Buncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig, 1910.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Über den Ursprung und die Hauptgesetze des wirtschaftlichen Werthes</em>, Alfred Hölder, Viena, 1884.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page440" title="440"/>Wilensky, Harold, <em>Industrial Relations: A Guide to Reading and Research</em>, University of Chicago, Chicago, 1956.</p>
    <p class="frances">Williams, Claire, <em>Blue, White and Pink Collar Workers: Technicians, Bank Employees and Flight Attendants</em>, Allen &amp; Unwin, Sydney, 1988.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Bill Thorpe, <em>Beyond Industrial Sociology: The Work of Men and Women</em>, Allen &amp; Unwin, North Sydney, 1992.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Open Cut: The Working Class in an Australian Mining Town</em>, George Allen &amp; Unwin, Sydney, 1981.</p>
    <p class="frances">Williams, Raymond, <em>Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1976.</p>
    <p class="frances">Williamson, Oliver E., “Selling Expense as a Barrier to Entry”, <em>Quarterly Journal of Economics</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">LXXVII</span>, núm.&#160;1, febrero de 1963.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization</em>, Free Press, Nueva York, 1975.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wilson, Joan Hoff, “Is the Historical Profession an ‘Endangered Species’?”, <em>The Public Historian</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">II</span>, 2, invierno de 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wilson, John, <em>Introduction to Social Movements</em>, Basic Books, Nueva York, 1973.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wilson, T. “Cyclical and Autonomous Inducements to Invest”, <em>Oxford Economic Papers</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, núm.&#160;1, marzo de 1953.</p>
    <p class="frances">Winn, Peter, <em>Weavers of Revolution: The Yarur Workers and Chile’s Road to Socialism</em>, Oxford University, Nueva York, 1986.</p>
    <p class="frances">Winter, J. M., “Webb, Beatrice and Sidney”, en John Eatwell <em>et al.</em> (eds.), <em>The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics</em>, 4 vols., Macmillan, Londres, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, pp.&#160;885.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wolf, Harry D., “Railroads”, en Harry A. Millis (ed.), <em></em>How Collective Bargaining Works, Twentieth Century Fund, Nueva York, 1942, pp. 374-375</p>
    <p class="frances">Wolff, Kurt H., ed. y trad., <em>The Sociology of Georg Simmel</em>, The Free Press, Nueva York, 1950, p.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XLIV</span>.</p>
    <p class="frances">Womack, John, Jr., “Interview”, en Henry Abelove <em>et al</em>. (eds.), <em>Visions of History</em>, Pantheon, Nueva York, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page441" title="441"/>Womack, John, Jr., “The Historiography of Mexican Labor” [1977], en Elsa Cecilia Frost <em>et al</em>. (eds.), <em>El trabajo y los trabajadores en la historia de México</em>, El Colegio de México y Universidad de Arizona, México, 1979, pp.&#160;745-755.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Mexican Economy during the Revolution, 1910-1920: Historiography and Analysis”, <em>Marxist Perspectives</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">I</span>, 4, diciembre de 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “The Mexican Revolution, 1910-1920” [1978], en Leslie Bethell (ed.), <em>The Cambridge History of Latin America</em>, 11 vols., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1984-1995, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">V</span>, p.&#160;153.</p>
    <p class="frances">Woodward, Joan, <em>Management and Technology</em>, hmso, Londres, 1958.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wright Mills, Charles, “The Contribution of Sociology to Studies of Industrial Relations” en <em>Proceedings of the First Annual Meeting, Industrial Relations Research Association, Year</em>, Industrial Relations Research Association, Champaign, 1948, pp.&#160;199-222.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The New Men of Power: America’s Labor Leaders</em>, Harcourt Brace, Nueva York, 1948.</p>
    <p class="frances">Wright, Erik O., <em>Class, Crisis and the State</em>, nlb, Londres, 1978.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Classes</em>, Verso, Londres, 1985.</p>
    <p class="frances">Young, Eric van, “The New Cultural History Comes to Old Mexico”, <em>Hispanic Amrican Historical Review</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIX</span>, 2, mayo de 1999, pp.&#160;211-247.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zald, Mayer N. y John McCarthy, eds., <em>Social Movements in an Organizational Society</em>, Transaction, New Brunswick, 1987.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zeitlin, Jonathan, “From Labour History to the History of Industrial Relations”, <em>Economic History Review</em>, nueva serie, <span class="versalitas bajas">XL</span>, núm.&#160;2, mayo de 1987, pp.&#160;159-184.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zeitlin, Maurice, “On Classes, Class Conflict, and the State: An Introductory Note”, en Zeitlin, Maurice, (ed.), <em>Classes, Class Conflict, and the State: Empirical Studies in Class Analysis</em>, Winthrop, Cambridge, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">— y Howard Kimeldorf, “How Mighty a Force? The Internal Differentiation and Relative Organization of the American <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page442" title="442"/>Working Class”, en Maurice Zeitlin (ed.), <em>How Mighty a Force? Studies of Workers’ Consciousness and Organization in the United States</em>, University of California, Los Ángeles, 1983.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zeitlin, Maurice, <em>Revolutionary Politics and the Cuban Working Class</em>, Princeton University, Princeton, 1967.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zeman, Z. A. B. y W. B. Scharlau, <em>The Merchant of Revolution: The Life of Alexander Israel Helphand (Parvus), 1867-</em>, Londres, Oxford University, 1965.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zemon Davies, Natalie, “A Trade Union in Sixteenth-Century France”, <em>Economic History Review</em>, sin serie, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">XIX</span>, núm.&#160;1, 1966, pp.&#160;52 y 58.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zetka, James R., Jr., “Union Homogenization and the Organizational Foundations of Plantwide Militancy in the U.S. Automobile Industry, 1959-1979”, <em>Social Forces</em>, <span class="versalitas bajas">LXXIII</span>, núm.&#160;3, marzo de 1995, pp.&#160;789-810.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Militancy, Market Dynamics and Workplace Authority: The Struggle Over Labor Process Outcomes in the U.S. Automobile Industry, 1946-1973</em>, State University of New York, Albany, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zeuthen, Frederik, <em>Den konomiske Fordeling</em>, Arnold Busck, Copenhague, 1928.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Problems of Monopoly and Economic Warefare</em>, traducción al inglés de Else Zeuthen, George Routledge &amp; Sons, Londres, 1930.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zieger, Robert H., <em>Rebuilding the Pulp and Paper Workers’ Union, 1933-1941</em>, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, 1984.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The <span class="versalitas bajas">CIO</span>, 1938-1955</em>, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1995.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zinóviev, Grigorii Y., “‘Ekonomika’ i ‘politika’ [1912]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, 16 vols. en 17, Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1923-26, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">III</span>, pp.&#160;280, 282.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Itogi i perspektivy [1914]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, p.&#160;511.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Novye takticheskie debaty v germanoskoi sotsial-demokratii [1913]”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, pp.&#160;261-264.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, “Poslednii lokaut i teoriia ‘stachechnogo azarta [1914]’”, <em>Sochineniia</em>, vol.&#160;<span class="versalitas bajas">IV</span>, pp.&#160;540-541.</p>
    <p class="frances"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page443" title="443"/>Zinóviev, Grigorii Y., “ECCI Appeal to the Proletariat of All Countries”, en Alan Adler (ed.), <em>Theses, Resolutions, and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third International</em>, trad. al inglés de Alix Holt y Barbara Holland, Pluto, Londres, 1980.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Die Tagesfragen der internationalen Arbeiterbewegung, Westeuropäischen Sekretariat der Kommunistischen Internationale</em>, Berlín, 1920.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Kommunisticheskii internatsional za rabotoi: Takticheskie problemy Komiterna i rabota ego sektsii: Rechi, proiznesennye na IV V semiron Kongresse Komiterna</em>, 2a. ed., Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo, Moscú, 1923.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>La question syndicale: Discours de Zinoviev au Ve Congrés de l’Internationale Communiste</em>, L’Humanité, París, 1924.</p> 
    <p class="frances">—, <em>Rabochaia partiia i professional’nye soiuzy (o “neitralizmie” profesional’nago dvizheniia)</em>, Gosudarstevennoe Tipografia, San Petersburgo, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">—, <em>The Communist Party and Industrial Unionism</em>, Workers’ Socialist Federation, Londres, 1918.</p>
    <p class="frances">Zveteremich, Pietro, <em>Il grande Parvus</em>, Milán, Garzanti, 1988.</p>
</body>
    
    
</html>
